the project gutenberg ebook of a doll s house  by henrik ibsen

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever   you may copy it  give it away or
re use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www gutenberg org


title  a doll s house

author  henrik ibsen

posting date  december 13  2008  ebook #2542 
release date  march  2001

language  english


    start of this project gutenberg ebook a doll s house    




produced by martin adamson





a doll s house

by henrik ibsen




dramatis personae

     torvald helmer 
     nora  his wife 
     doctor rank 
     mrs  linde 
     nils krogstad 
     helmer s three young children 
     anne  their nurse 
     a housemaid 
     a porter 
     (the action takes place in helmer s house )

     a doll s house




act i

(scene   a room furnished comfortably and tastefully  but not
extravagantly  at the back  a door to the right leads to the
entrance hall  another to the left leads to helmer s study  between the
doors stands a piano  in the middle of the left hand wall is a door  and
beyond it a window  near the window are a round table  arm chairs and
a small sofa  in the right hand wall  at the farther end  another door 
and on the same side  nearer the footlights  a stove  two easy chairs
and a rocking chair  between the stove and the door  a small table 
engravings on the walls  a cabinet with china and other small objects 
a small book case with well bound books  the floors are carpeted  and a
fire burns in the stove  it is winter 

a bell rings in the hall  shortly afterwards the door is heard to open 
enter nora  humming a tune and in high spirits  she is in outdoor dress
and carries a number of parcels  these she lays on the table to the
right  she leaves the outer door open after her  and through it is seen
a porter who is carrying a christmas tree and a basket  which he gives
to the maid who has opened the door )

nora  hide the christmas tree carefully  helen  be sure the children
do not see it until this evening  when it is dressed  (to the porter 
taking out her purse ) how much?

porter  sixpence 

nora  there is a shilling  no  keep the change  (the porter thanks her 
and goes out  nora shuts the door  she is laughing to herself  as she
takes off her hat and coat  she takes a packet of macaroons from her
pocket and eats one or two  then goes cautiously to her husband s door
and listens ) yes  he is in  (still humming  she goes to the table on
the right )

helmer (calls out from his room)  is that my little lark twittering out
there?

nora (busy opening some of the parcels)  yes  it is!

helmer  is it my little squirrel bustling about?

nora  yes!

helmer  when did my squirrel come home?

nora  just now  (puts the bag of macaroons into her pocket and wipes her
mouth ) come in here  torvald  and see what i have bought 

helmer  don t disturb me  (a little later  he opens the door and looks
into the room  pen in hand ) bought  did you say? all these things? has
my little spendthrift been wasting money again?

nora  yes but  torvald  this year we really can let ourselves go
a little  this is the first christmas that we have not needed to
economise 

helmer  still  you know  we can t spend money recklessly  nora  yes 
torvald  we may be a wee bit more reckless now  mayn t we? just a tiny
wee bit! you are going to have a big salary and earn lots and lots of
money 

helmer  yes  after the new year  but then it will be a whole quarter
before the salary is due 

nora  pooh! we can borrow until then 

helmer  nora! (goes up to her and takes her playfully by the ear ) the
same little featherhead! suppose  now  that i borrowed fifty pounds
today  and you spent it all in the christmas week  and then on new
year s eve a slate fell on my head and killed me  and  nora (putting her
hands over his mouth)  oh! don t say such horrid things 

helmer  still  suppose that happened   what then?

nora  if that were to happen  i don t suppose i should care whether i
owed money or not 

helmer  yes  but what about the people who had lent it?

nora  they? who would bother about them? i should not know who they
were 

helmer  that is like a woman! but seriously  nora  you know what i think
about that  no debt  no borrowing  there can be no freedom or beauty
about a home life that depends on borrowing and debt  we two have kept
bravely on the straight road so far  and we will go on the same way for
the short time longer that there need be any struggle 

nora (moving towards the stove)  as you please  torvald 

helmer (following her)  come  come  my little skylark must not droop her
wings  what is this! is my little squirrel out of temper? (taking out
his purse ) nora  what do you think i have got here?

nora (turning round quickly)  money!

helmer  there you are  (gives her some money ) do you think i don t know
what a lot is wanted for housekeeping at christmas time?

nora (counting)  ten shillings  a pound  two pounds! thank you  thank
you  torvald  that will keep me going for a long time 

helmer  indeed it must 

nora  yes  yes  it will  but come here and let me show you what i have
bought  and all so cheap! look  here is a new suit for ivar  and
a sword  and a horse and a trumpet for bob  and a doll and dolly s
bedstead for emmy   they are very plain  but anyway she will soon break
them in pieces  and here are dress lengths and handkerchiefs for the
maids  old anne ought really to have something better 

helmer  and what is in this parcel?

nora (crying out)  no  no! you mustn t see that until this evening 

helmer  very well  but now tell me  you extravagant little person  what
would you like for yourself?

nora  for myself? oh  i am sure i don t want anything 

helmer  yes  but you must  tell me something reasonable that you would
particularly like to have 

nora  no  i really can t think of anything  unless  torvald  

helmer  well?

nora (playing with his coat buttons  and without raising her eyes to
his)  if you really want to give me something  you might  you might  

helmer  well  out with it!

nora (speaking quickly)  you might give me money  torvald  only just as
much as you can afford  and then one of these days i will buy something
with it 

helmer  but  nora  

nora  oh  do! dear torvald  please  please do! then i will wrap it up in
beautiful gilt paper and hang it on the christmas tree  wouldn t that be
fun?

helmer  what are little people called that are always wasting money?

nora  spendthrifts  i know  let us do as you suggest  torvald  and then
i shall have time to think what i am most in want of  that is a very
sensible plan  isn t it?

helmer (smiling)  indeed it is  that is to say  if you were really to
save out of the money i give you  and then really buy something for
yourself  but if you spend it all on the housekeeping and any number of
unnecessary things  then i merely have to pay up again 

nora  oh but  torvald  

helmer  you can t deny it  my dear little nora  (puts his arm round
her waist ) it s a sweet little spendthrift  but she uses up a deal of
money  one would hardly believe how expensive such little persons are!

nora  it s a shame to say that  i do really save all i can 

helmer (laughing)  that s very true   all you can  but you can t save
anything!

nora (smiling quietly and happily)  you haven t any idea how many
expenses we skylarks and squirrels have  torvald 

helmer  you are an odd little soul  very like your father  you always
find some new way of wheedling money out of me  and  as soon as you
have got it  it seems to melt in your hands  you never know where it
has gone  still  one must take you as you are  it is in the blood  for
indeed it is true that you can inherit these things  nora 

nora  ah  i wish i had inherited many of papa s qualities 

helmer  and i would not wish you to be anything but just what you are 
my sweet little skylark  but  do you know  it strikes me that you are
looking rather  what shall i say  rather uneasy today?

nora  do i?

helmer  you do  really  look straight at me 

nora (looks at him)  well?

helmer (wagging his finger at her)  hasn t miss sweet tooth been
breaking rules in town today?

nora  no  what makes you think that?

helmer  hasn t she paid a visit to the confectioner s?

nora  no  i assure you  torvald  

helmer  not been nibbling sweets?

nora  no  certainly not 

helmer  not even taken a bite at a macaroon or two?

nora  no  torvald  i assure you really  

helmer  there  there  of course i was only joking 

nora (going to the table on the right)  i should not think of going
against your wishes 

helmer  no  i am sure of that  besides  you gave me your word   (going
up to her ) keep your little christmas secrets to yourself  my darling 
they will all be revealed tonight when the christmas tree is lit  no
doubt 

nora  did you remember to invite doctor rank?

helmer  no  but there is no need  as a matter of course he will come to
dinner with us  however  i will ask him when he comes in this morning 
i have ordered some good wine  nora  you can t think how i am looking
forward to this evening 

nora  so am i! and how the children will enjoy themselves  torvald!

helmer  it is splendid to feel that one has a perfectly safe
appointment  and a big enough income  it s delightful to think of  isn t
it?

nora  it s wonderful!

helmer  do you remember last christmas? for a full three weeks
beforehand you shut yourself up every evening until long after midnight 
making ornaments for the christmas tree  and all the other fine things
that were to be a surprise to us  it was the dullest three weeks i ever
spent!

nora  i didn t find it dull 

helmer (smiling)  but there was precious little result  nora 

nora  oh  you shouldn t tease me about that again  how could i help the
cat s going in and tearing everything to pieces?

helmer  of course you couldn t  poor little girl  you had the best of
intentions to please us all  and that s the main thing  but it is a good
thing that our hard times are over 

nora  yes  it is really wonderful 

helmer  this time i needn t sit here and be dull all alone  and you
needn t ruin your dear eyes and your pretty little hands  

nora (clapping her hands)  no  torvald  i needn t any longer  need i!
it s wonderfully lovely to hear you say so! (taking his arm ) now i will
tell you how i have been thinking we ought to arrange things  torvald 
as soon as christmas is over  (a bell rings in the hall ) there s the
bell  (she tidies the room a little ) there s some one at the door  what
a nuisance!

helmer  if it is a caller  remember i am not at home 

maid (in the doorway)  a lady to see you  ma am   a stranger 

nora  ask her to come in 

maid (to helmer)  the doctor came at the same time  sir 

helmer  did he go straight into my room?

maid  yes  sir 

(helmer goes into his room  the maid ushers in mrs  linde  who is in
travelling dress  and shuts the door ) mrs  linde (in a dejected and
timid voice)  how do you do  nora?

nora (doubtfully)  how do you do  mrs  linde  you don t recognise me  i
suppose 

nora  no  i don t know  yes  to be sure  i seem to  (suddenly ) yes!
christine! is it really you?

mrs  linde  yes  it is i 

nora  christine! to think of my not recognising you! and yet how could
i  (in a gentle voice ) how you have altered  christine!

mrs  linde  yes  i have indeed  in nine  ten long years  

nora  is it so long since we met? i suppose it is  the last eight years
have been a happy time for me  i can tell you  and so now you have come
into the town  and have taken this long journey in winter  that was
plucky of you 

mrs  linde  i arrived by steamer this morning 

nora  to have some fun at christmas time  of course  how delightful! we
will have such fun together! but take off your things  you are not cold 
i hope  (helps her ) now we will sit down by the stove  and be cosy 
no  take this armchair  i will sit here in the rocking chair  (takes
her hands ) now you look like your old self again  it was only the first
moment  you are a little paler  christine  and perhaps a little thinner 

mrs  linde  and much  much older  nora 

nora  perhaps a little older  very  very little  certainly not much 
(stops suddenly and speaks seriously ) what a thoughtless creature i am 
chattering away like this  my poor  dear christine  do forgive me 

mrs  linde  what do you mean  nora?

nora (gently)  poor christine  you are a widow 

mrs  linde  yes  it is three years ago now 

nora  yes  i knew  i saw it in the papers  i assure you  christine  i
meant ever so often to write to you at the time  but i always put it off
and something always prevented me 

mrs  linde  i quite understand  dear 

nora  it was very bad of me  christine  poor thing  how you must have
suffered  and he left you nothing?

mrs  linde  no 

nora  and no children?

mrs  linde  no 

nora  nothing at all  then 

mrs  linde  not even any sorrow or grief to live upon 

nora (looking incredulously at her)  but  christine  is that possible?

mrs  linde (smiles sadly and strokes her hair)  it sometimes happens 
nora 

nora  so you are quite alone  how dreadfully sad that must be  i have
three lovely children  you can t see them just now  for they are out
with their nurse  but now you must tell me all about it 

mrs  linde  no  no  i want to hear about you 

nora  no  you must begin  i mustn t be selfish today  today i must only
think of your affairs  but there is one thing i must tell you  do you
know we have just had a great piece of good luck?

mrs  linde  no  what is it?

nora  just fancy  my husband has been made manager of the bank!

mrs  linde  your husband? what good luck!

nora  yes  tremendous! a barrister s profession is such an uncertain
thing  especially if he won t undertake unsavoury cases  and naturally
torvald has never been willing to do that  and i quite agree with him 
you may imagine how pleased we are! he is to take up his work in the
bank at the new year  and then he will have a big salary and lots of
commissions  for the future we can live quite differently  we can do
just as we like  i feel so relieved and so happy  christine! it will be
splendid to have heaps of money and not need to have any anxiety  won t
it?

mrs  linde  yes  anyhow i think it would be delightful to have what one
needs 

nora  no  not only what one needs  but heaps and heaps of money 

mrs  linde (smiling)  nora  nora  haven t you learned sense yet? in our
schooldays you were a great spendthrift 

nora (laughing)  yes  that is what torvald says now  (wags her finger at
her ) but  nora  nora  is not so silly as you think  we have not been in
a position for me to waste money  we have both had to work 

mrs  linde  you too?

nora  yes  odds and ends  needlework  crotchet work  embroidery  and
that kind of thing  (dropping her voice ) and other things as well  you
know torvald left his office when we were married? there was no prospect
of promotion there  and he had to try and earn more than before  but
during the first year he over worked himself dreadfully  you see  he had
to make money every way he could  and he worked early and late  but he
couldn t stand it  and fell dreadfully ill  and the doctors said it was
necessary for him to go south 

mrs  linde  you spent a whole year in italy  didn t you?

nora  yes  it was no easy matter to get away  i can tell you  it
was just after ivar was born  but naturally we had to go  it was a
wonderfully beautiful journey  and it saved torvald s life  but it cost
a tremendous lot of money  christine 

mrs  linde  so i should think 

nora  it cost about two hundred and fifty pounds  that s a lot  isn t
it?

mrs  linde  yes  and in emergencies like that it is lucky to have the
money 

nora  i ought to tell you that we had it from papa 

mrs  linde  oh  i see  it was just about that time that he died  wasn t
it?

nora  yes  and  just think of it  i couldn t go and nurse him  i was
expecting little ivar s birth every day and i had my poor sick torvald
to look after  my dear  kind father  i never saw him again  christine 
that was the saddest time i have known since our marriage 

mrs  linde  i know how fond you were of him  and then you went off to
italy?

nora  yes  you see we had money then  and the doctors insisted on our
going  so we started a month later 

mrs  linde  and your husband came back quite well?

nora  as sound as a bell!

mrs  linde  but  the doctor?

nora  what doctor?

mrs  linde  i thought your maid said the gentleman who arrived here just
as i did  was the doctor?

nora  yes  that was doctor rank  but he doesn t come here
professionally  he is our greatest friend  and comes in at least once
every day  no  torvald has not had an hour s illness since then  and our
children are strong and healthy and so am i  (jumps up and claps her
hands ) christine! christine! it s good to be alive and happy!  but how
horrid of me  i am talking of nothing but my own affairs  (sits on a
stool near her  and rests her arms on her knees ) you mustn t be angry
with me  tell me  is it really true that you did not love your husband?
why did you marry him?

mrs  linde  my mother was alive then  and was bedridden and helpless 
and i had to provide for my two younger brothers  so i did not think i
was justified in refusing his offer 

nora  no  perhaps you were quite right  he was rich at that time  then?

mrs  linde  i believe he was quite well off  but his business was a
precarious one  and  when he died  it all went to pieces and there was
nothing left 

nora  and then?  

mrs  linde  well  i had to turn my hand to anything i could find  first
a small shop  then a small school  and so on  the last three years have
seemed like one long working day  with no rest  now it is at an end 
nora  my poor mother needs me no more  for she is gone  and the boys
do not need me either  they have got situations and can shift for
themselves 

nora  what a relief you must feel if  

mrs  linde  no  indeed  i only feel my life unspeakably empty  no one to
live for anymore  (gets up restlessly ) that was why i could not stand
the life in my little backwater any longer  i hope it may be easier here
to find something which will busy me and occupy my thoughts  if only i
could have the good luck to get some regular work  office work of some
kind  

nora  but  christine  that is so frightfully tiring  and you look tired
out now  you had far better go away to some watering place 

mrs  linde (walking to the window)  i have no father to give me money
for a journey  nora 

nora (rising)  oh  don t be angry with me!

mrs  linde (going up to her)  it is you that must not be angry with me 
dear  the worst of a position like mine is that it makes one so bitter 
no one to work for  and yet obliged to be always on the lookout for
chances  one must live  and so one becomes selfish  when you told me of
the happy turn your fortunes have taken  you will hardly believe it  i
was delighted not so much on your account as on my own 

nora  how do you mean?  oh  i understand  you mean that perhaps torvald
could get you something to do 

mrs  linde  yes  that was what i was thinking of 

nora  he must  christine  just leave it to me  i will broach the subject
very cleverly  i will think of something that will please him very much 
it will make me so happy to be of some use to you 

mrs  linde  how kind you are  nora  to be so anxious to help me! it is
doubly kind in you  for you know so little of the burdens and troubles
of life 

nora  i  ? i know so little of them?

mrs  linde (smiling)  my dear! small household cares and that sort of
thing!  you are a child  nora 

nora (tosses her head and crosses the stage)  you ought not to be so
superior 

mrs  linde  no?

nora  you are just like the others  they all think that i am incapable
of anything really serious  

mrs  linde  come  come  

nora   that i have gone through nothing in this world of cares 

mrs  linde  but  my dear nora  you have just told me all your troubles 

nora  pooh!  those were trifles  (lowering her voice ) i have not told
you the important thing 

mrs  linde  the important thing? what do you mean?

nora  you look down upon me altogether  christine  but you ought not to 
you are proud  aren t you  of having worked so hard and so long for your
mother?

mrs  linde  indeed  i don t look down on anyone  but it is true that i
am both proud and glad to think that i was privileged to make the end of
my mother s life almost free from care 

nora  and you are proud to think of what you have done for your
brothers?

mrs  linde  i think i have the right to be 

nora  i think so  too  but now  listen to this  i too have something to
be proud and glad of 

mrs  linde  i have no doubt you have  but what do you refer to?

nora  speak low  suppose torvald were to hear! he mustn t on any
account  no one in the world must know  christine  except you 

mrs  linde  but what is it?

nora  come here  (pulls her down on the sofa beside her ) now i will
show you that i too have something to be proud and glad of  it was i who
saved torvald s life 

mrs  linde   saved ? how?

nora  i told you about our trip to italy  torvald would never have
recovered if he had not gone there  

mrs  linde  yes  but your father gave you the necessary funds 

nora (smiling)  yes  that is what torvald and all the others think 
but  

mrs  linde  but  

nora  papa didn t give us a shilling  it was i who procured the money 

mrs  linde  you? all that large sum?

nora  two hundred and fifty pounds  what do you think of that?

mrs  linde  but  nora  how could you possibly do it? did you win a prize
in the lottery?

nora (contemptuously)  in the lottery? there would have been no credit
in that 

mrs  linde  but where did you get it from  then? nora (humming and
smiling with an air of mystery)  hm  hm! aha!

mrs  linde  because you couldn t have borrowed it 

nora  couldn t i? why not?

mrs  linde  no  a wife cannot borrow without her husband s consent 

nora (tossing her head)  oh  if it is a wife who has any head for
business  a wife who has the wit to be a little bit clever  

mrs  linde  i don t understand it at all  nora 

nora  there is no need you should  i never said i had borrowed the
money  i may have got it some other way  (lies back on the sofa )
perhaps i got it from some other admirer  when anyone is as attractive
as i am  

mrs  linde  you are a mad creature 

nora  now  you know you re full of curiosity  christine 

mrs  linde  listen to me  nora dear  haven t you been a little bit
imprudent?

nora (sits up straight)  is it imprudent to save your husband s life?

mrs  linde  it seems to me imprudent  without his knowledge  to  

nora  but it was absolutely necessary that he should not know! my
goodness  can t you understand that? it was necessary he should have no
idea what a dangerous condition he was in  it was to me that the doctors
came and said that his life was in danger  and that the only thing to
save him was to live in the south  do you suppose i didn t try  first of
all  to get what i wanted as if it were for myself? i told him how much
i should love to travel abroad like other young wives  i tried tears and
entreaties with him  i told him that he ought to remember the condition
i was in  and that he ought to be kind and indulgent to me  i even
hinted that he might raise a loan  that nearly made him angry 
christine  he said i was thoughtless  and that it was his duty as my
husband not to indulge me in my whims and caprices  as i believe he
called them  very well  i thought  you must be saved  and that was how i
came to devise a way out of the difficulty  

mrs  linde  and did your husband never get to know from your father that
the money had not come from him?

nora  no  never  papa died just at that time  i had meant to let him
into the secret and beg him never to reveal it  but he was so ill
then  alas  there never was any need to tell him 

mrs  linde  and since then have you never told your secret to your
husband?

nora  good heavens  no! how could you think so? a man who has such
strong opinions about these things! and besides  how painful and
humiliating it would be for torvald  with his manly independence  to
know that he owed me anything! it would upset our mutual relations
altogether  our beautiful happy home would no longer be what it is now 

mrs  linde  do you mean never to tell him about it?

nora (meditatively  and with a half smile)  yes  someday  perhaps  after
many years  when i am no longer as nice looking as i am now  don t laugh
at me! i mean  of course  when torvald is no longer as devoted to me as
he is now  when my dancing and dressing up and reciting have palled on
him  then it may be a good thing to have something in reserve  (breaking
off ) what nonsense! that time will never come  now  what do you think
of my great secret  christine? do you still think i am of no use? i can
tell you  too  that this affair has caused me a lot of worry  it has
been by no means easy for me to meet my engagements punctually  i may
tell you that there is something that is called  in business  quarterly
interest  and another thing called payment in installments  and it is
always so dreadfully difficult to manage them  i have had to save a
little here and there  where i could  you understand  i have not been
able to put aside much from my housekeeping money  for torvald must have
a good table  i couldn t let my children be shabbily dressed  i have
felt obliged to use up all he gave me for them  the sweet little
darlings!

mrs  linde  so it has all had to come out of your own necessaries of
life  poor nora?

nora  of course  besides  i was the one responsible for it  whenever
torvald has given me money for new dresses and such things  i have
never spent more than half of it  i have always bought the simplest
and cheapest things  thank heaven  any clothes look well on me  and
so torvald has never noticed it  but it was often very hard on me 
christine  because it is delightful to be really well dressed  isn t it?

mrs  linde  quite so 

nora  well  then i have found other ways of earning money  last winter
i was lucky enough to get a lot of copying to do  so i locked myself up
and sat writing every evening until quite late at night  many a time i
was desperately tired  but all the same it was a tremendous pleasure to
sit there working and earning money  it was like being a man 

mrs  linde  how much have you been able to pay off in that way?

nora  i can t tell you exactly  you see  it is very difficult to keep an
account of a business matter of that kind  i only know that i have paid
every penny that i could scrape together  many a time i was at my wits 
end  (smiles ) then i used to sit here and imagine that a rich old
gentleman had fallen in love with me  

mrs  linde  what! who was it?

nora  be quiet!  that he had died  and that when his will was opened
it contained  written in big letters  the instruction   the lovely mrs 
nora helmer is to have all i possess paid over to her at once in cash  

mrs  linde  but  my dear nora  who could the man be?

nora  good gracious  can t you understand? there was no old gentleman at
all  it was only something that i used to sit here and imagine  when i
couldn t think of any way of procuring money  but it s all the same now 
the tiresome old person can stay where he is  as far as i am concerned 
i don t care about him or his will either  for i am free from care now 
(jumps up ) my goodness  it s delightful to think of  christine! free
from care! to be able to be free from care  quite free from care  to be
able to play and romp with the children  to be able to keep the house
beautifully and have everything just as torvald likes it! and  think of
it  soon the spring will come and the big blue sky! perhaps we shall be
able to take a little trip  perhaps i shall see the sea again! oh  it s
a wonderful thing to be alive and be happy  (a bell is heard in the
hall )

mrs  linde (rising)  there is the bell  perhaps i had better go 

nora  no  don t go  no one will come in here  it is sure to be for
torvald 

servant (at the hall door)  excuse me  ma am  there is a gentleman to
see the master  and as the doctor is with him  

nora  who is it?

krogstad (at the door)  it is i  mrs  helmer  (mrs  linde starts 
trembles  and turns to the window )

nora (takes a step towards him  and speaks in a strained  low voice) 
you? what is it? what do you want to see my husband about?

krogstad  bank business  in a way  i have a small post in the bank  and
i hear your husband is to be our chief now  

nora  then it is  

krogstad  nothing but dry business matters  mrs  helmer  absolutely
nothing else 

nora  be so good as to go into the study  then  (she bows indifferently
to him and shuts the door into the hall  then comes back and makes up
the fire in the stove )

mrs  linde  nora  who was that man?

nora  a lawyer  of the name of krogstad 

mrs  linde  then it really was he 

nora  do you know the man?

mrs  linde  i used to  many years ago  at one time he was a solicitor s
clerk in our town 

nora  yes  he was 

mrs  linde  he is greatly altered 

nora  he made a very unhappy marriage 

mrs  linde  he is a widower now  isn t he?

nora  with several children  there now  it is burning up  (shuts the
door of the stove and moves the rocking chair aside )

mrs  linde  they say he carries on various kinds of business 

nora  really! perhaps he does  i don t know anything about it  but don t
let us think of business  it is so tiresome 

doctor rank (comes out of helmer s study  before he shuts the door he
calls to him)  no  my dear fellow  i won t disturb you  i would rather
go in to your wife for a little while  (shuts the door and sees mrs 
linde ) i beg your pardon  i am afraid i am disturbing you too 

nora  no  not at all  (introducing him)  doctor rank  mrs  linde 

rank  i have often heard mrs  linde s name mentioned here  i think i
passed you on the stairs when i arrived  mrs  linde?

mrs  linde  yes  i go up very slowly  i can t manage stairs well 

rank  ah! some slight internal weakness?

mrs  linde  no  the fact is i have been overworking myself 

rank  nothing more than that? then i suppose you have come to town to
amuse yourself with our entertainments?

mrs  linde  i have come to look for work 

rank  is that a good cure for overwork?

mrs  linde  one must live  doctor rank 

rank  yes  the general opinion seems to be that it is necessary 

nora  look here  doctor rank  you know you want to live 

rank  certainly  however wretched i may feel  i want to prolong the
agony as long as possible  all my patients are like that  and so are
those who are morally diseased  one of them  and a bad case too  is at
this very moment with helmer  

mrs  linde (sadly)  ah!

nora  whom do you mean?

rank  a lawyer of the name of krogstad  a fellow you don t know at all 
he suffers from a diseased moral character  mrs  helmer  but even he
began talking of its being highly important that he should live 

nora  did he? what did he want to speak to torvald about?

rank  i have no idea  i only heard that it was something about the bank 

nora  i didn t know this  what s his name  krogstad had anything to do
with the bank 

rank  yes  he has some sort of appointment there  (to mrs  linde ) i
don t know whether you find also in your part of the world that there
are certain people who go zealously snuffing about to smell out moral
corruption  and  as soon as they have found some  put the person
concerned into some lucrative position where they can keep their eye on
him  healthy natures are left out in the cold 

mrs  linde  still i think the sick are those who most need taking care
of 

rank (shrugging his shoulders)  yes  there you are  that is the
sentiment that is turning society into a sick house 

(nora  who has been absorbed in her thoughts  breaks out into smothered
laughter and claps her hands )

rank  why do you laugh at that? have you any notion what society really
is?

nora  what do i care about tiresome society? i am laughing at something
quite different  something extremely amusing  tell me  doctor rank  are
all the people who are employed in the bank dependent on torvald now?

rank  is that what you find so extremely amusing?

nora (smiling and humming)  that s my affair! (walking about the room )
it s perfectly glorious to think that we have  that torvald has so much
power over so many people  (takes the packet from her pocket ) doctor
rank  what do you say to a macaroon?

rank  what  macaroons? i thought they were forbidden here 

nora  yes  but these are some christine gave me 

mrs  linde  what! i?  

nora  oh  well  don t be alarmed! you couldn t know that torvald had
forbidden them  i must tell you that he is afraid they will spoil my
teeth  but  bah!  once in a way  that s so  isn t it  doctor rank? by
your leave! (puts a macaroon into his mouth ) you must have one too 
christine  and i shall have one  just a little one  or at most two 
(walking about ) i am tremendously happy  there is just one thing in the
world now that i should dearly love to do 

rank  well  what is that?

nora  it s something i should dearly love to say  if torvald could hear
me 

rank  well  why can t you say it?

nora  no  i daren t  it s so shocking 

mrs  linde  shocking?

rank  well  i should not advise you to say it  still  with us you might 
what is it you would so much like to say if torvald could hear you?

nora  i should just love to say  well  i m damned!

rank  are you mad?

mrs  linde  nora  dear  !

rank  say it  here he is!

nora (hiding the packet)  hush! hush! hush! (helmer comes out of his
room  with his coat over his arm and his hat in his hand )

nora  well  torvald dear  have you got rid of him?

helmer  yes  he has just gone 

nora  let me introduce you  this is christine  who has come to town 

helmer  christine  ? excuse me  but i don t know  

nora  mrs  linde  dear  christine linde 

helmer  of course  a school friend of my wife s  i presume?

mrs  linde  yes  we have known each other since then 

nora  and just think  she has taken a long journey in order to see you 

helmer  what do you mean? mrs  linde  no  really  i  

nora  christine is tremendously clever at book keeping  and she is
frightfully anxious to work under some clever man  so as to perfect
herself  

helmer  very sensible  mrs  linde 

nora  and when she heard you had been appointed manager of the bank  the
news was telegraphed  you know  she travelled here as quick as
she could  torvald  i am sure you will be able to do something for
christine  for my sake  won t you?

helmer  well  it is not altogether impossible  i presume you are a
widow  mrs  linde?

mrs  linde  yes 

helmer  and have had some experience of book keeping?

mrs  linde  yes  a fair amount 

helmer  ah! well  it s very likely i may be able to find something for
you  

nora (clapping her hands)  what did i tell you? what did i tell you?

helmer  you have just come at a fortunate moment  mrs  linde 

mrs  linde  how am i to thank you?

helmer  there is no need  (puts on his coat ) but today you must excuse
me  

rank  wait a minute  i will come with you  (brings his fur coat from the
hall and warms it at the fire )

nora  don t be long away  torvald dear 

helmer  about an hour  not more 

nora  are you going too  christine?

mrs  linde (putting on her cloak)  yes  i must go and look for a room 

helmer  oh  well then  we can walk down the street together 

nora (helping her)  what a pity it is we are so short of space here  i
am afraid it is impossible for us  

mrs  linde  please don t think of it! goodbye  nora dear  and many
thanks 

nora  goodbye for the present  of course you will come back this
evening  and you too  dr  rank  what do you say? if you are well enough?
oh  you must be! wrap yourself up well  (they go to the door all talking
together  children s voices are heard on the staircase )

nora  there they are! there they are! (she runs to open the door  the
nurse comes in with the children ) come in! come in! (stoops and kisses
them ) oh  you sweet blessings! look at them  christine! aren t they
darlings?

rank  don t let us stand here in the draught 

helmer  come along  mrs  linde  the place will only be bearable for a
mother now!

(rank  helmer  and mrs  linde go downstairs  the nurse comes forward
with the children  nora shuts the hall door )

nora  how fresh and well you look! such red cheeks like apples and
roses  (the children all talk at once while she speaks to them ) have
you had great fun? that s splendid! what  you pulled both emmy and bob
along on the sledge?  both at once?  that was good  you are a clever
boy  ivar  let me take her for a little  anne  my sweet little baby
doll! (takes the baby from the maid and dances it up and down ) yes 
yes  mother will dance with bob too  what! have you been snowballing? i
wish i had been there too! no  no  i will take their things off  anne 
please let me do it  it is such fun  go in now  you look half frozen 
there is some hot coffee for you on the stove 

(the nurse goes into the room on the left  nora takes off the children s
things and throws them about  while they all talk to her at once )

nora  really! did a big dog run after you? but it didn t bite you? no 
dogs don t bite nice little dolly children  you mustn t look at the
parcels  ivar  what are they? ah  i daresay you would like to know  no 
no  it s something nasty! come  let us have a game! what shall we play
at? hide and seek? yes  we ll play hide and seek  bob shall hide first 
must i hide? very well  i ll hide first  (she and the children laugh
and shout  and romp in and out of the room  at last nora hides under the
table  the children rush in and out for her  but do not see her  they
hear her smothered laughter  run to the table  lift up the cloth
and find her  shouts of laughter  she crawls forward and pretends to
frighten them  fresh laughter  meanwhile there has been a knock at the
hall door  but none of them has noticed it  the door is half opened  and
krogstad appears  he waits a little  the game goes on )

krogstad  excuse me  mrs  helmer 

nora (with a stifled cry  turns round and gets up on to her knees)  ah!
what do you want?

krogstad  excuse me  the outer door was ajar  i suppose someone forgot
to shut it 

nora (rising)  my husband is out  mr  krogstad 

krogstad  i know that 

nora  what do you want here  then?

krogstad  a word with you 

nora  with me?  (to the children  gently ) go in to nurse  what? no 
the strange man won t do mother any harm  when he has gone we will have
another game  (she takes the children into the room on the left  and
shuts the door after them ) you want to speak to me?

krogstad  yes  i do 

nora  today? it is not the first of the month yet 

krogstad  no  it is christmas eve  and it will depend on yourself what
sort of a christmas you will spend 

nora  what do you mean? today it is absolutely impossible for me  

krogstad  we won t talk about that until later on  this is something
different  i presume you can give me a moment?

nora  yes  yes  i can  although  

krogstad  good  i was in olsen s restaurant and saw your husband going
down the street  

nora  yes?

krogstad  with a lady 

nora  what then?

krogstad  may i make so bold as to ask if it was a mrs  linde?

nora  it was 

krogstad  just arrived in town?

nora  yes  today 

krogstad  she is a great friend of yours  isn t she?

nora  she is  but i don t see  

krogstad  i knew her too  once upon a time 

nora  i am aware of that 

krogstad  are you? so you know all about it  i thought as much  then i
can ask you  without beating about the bush  is mrs  linde to have an
appointment in the bank?

nora  what right have you to question me  mr  krogstad?  you  one of
my husband s subordinates! but since you ask  you shall know  yes  mrs 
linde is to have an appointment  and it was i who pleaded her cause  mr 
krogstad  let me tell you that 

krogstad  i was right in what i thought  then 

nora (walking up and down the stage)  sometimes one has a tiny little
bit of influence  i should hope  because one is a woman  it does not
necessarily follow that    when anyone is in a subordinate position 
mr  krogstad  they should really be careful to avoid offending anyone
who  who  

krogstad  who has influence?

nora  exactly 

krogstad (changing his tone)  mrs  helmer  you will be so good as to use
your influence on my behalf 

nora  what? what do you mean?

krogstad  you will be so kind as to see that i am allowed to keep my
subordinate position in the bank 

nora  what do you mean by that? who proposes to take your post away from
you?

krogstad  oh  there is no necessity to keep up the pretence of
ignorance  i can quite understand that your friend is not very anxious
to expose herself to the chance of rubbing shoulders with me  and i
quite understand  too  whom i have to thank for being turned off 

nora  but i assure you  

krogstad  very likely  but  to come to the point  the time has come when
i should advise you to use your influence to prevent that 

nora  but  mr  krogstad  i have no influence 

krogstad  haven t you? i thought you said yourself just now  

nora  naturally i did not mean you to put that construction on it  i!
what should make you think i have any influence of that kind with my
husband?

krogstad  oh  i have known your husband from our student days  i don t
suppose he is any more unassailable than other husbands 

nora  if you speak slightingly of my husband  i shall turn you out of
the house 

krogstad  you are bold  mrs  helmer 

nora  i am not afraid of you any longer  as soon as the new year comes 
i shall in a very short time be free of the whole thing 

krogstad (controlling himself)  listen to me  mrs  helmer  if necessary 
i am prepared to fight for my small post in the bank as if i were
fighting for my life 

nora  so it seems 

krogstad  it is not only for the sake of the money  indeed  that weighs
least with me in the matter  there is another reason  well  i may as
well tell you  my position is this  i daresay you know  like everybody
else  that once  many years ago  i was guilty of an indiscretion 

nora  i think i have heard something of the kind 

krogstad  the matter never came into court  but every way seemed to be
closed to me after that  so i took to the business that you know of  i
had to do something  and  honestly  i don t think i ve been one of the
worst  but now i must cut myself free from all that  my sons are growing
up  for their sake i must try and win back as much respect as i can in
the town  this post in the bank was like the first step up for me  and
now your husband is going to kick me downstairs again into the mud 

nora  but you must believe me  mr  krogstad  it is not in my power to
help you at all 

krogstad  then it is because you haven t the will  but i have means to
compel you 

nora  you don t mean that you will tell my husband that i owe you money?

krogstad  hm!  suppose i were to tell him?

nora  it would be perfectly infamous of you  (sobbing ) to think of his
learning my secret  which has been my joy and pride  in such an ugly 
clumsy way  that he should learn it from you! and it would put me in a
horribly disagreeable position  

krogstad  only disagreeable?

nora (impetuously)  well  do it  then!  and it will be the worse for
you  my husband will see for himself what a blackguard you are  and you
certainly won t keep your post then 

krogstad  i asked you if it was only a disagreeable scene at home that
you were afraid of?

nora  if my husband does get to know of it  of course he will at once
pay you what is still owing  and we shall have nothing more to do with
you 

krogstad (coming a step nearer)  listen to me  mrs  helmer  either you
have a very bad memory or you know very little of business  i shall be
obliged to remind you of a few details 

nora  what do you mean?

krogstad  when your husband was ill  you came to me to borrow two
hundred and fifty pounds 

nora  i didn t know anyone else to go to 

krogstad  i promised to get you that amount  

nora  yes  and you did so 

krogstad  i promised to get you that amount  on certain conditions 
your mind was so taken up with your husband s illness  and you were so
anxious to get the money for your journey  that you seem to have paid
no attention to the conditions of our bargain  therefore it will not be
amiss if i remind you of them  now  i promised to get the money on the
security of a bond which i drew up 

nora  yes  and which i signed 

krogstad  good  but below your signature there were a few lines
constituting your father a surety for the money  those lines your father
should have signed 

nora  should? he did sign them 

krogstad  i had left the date blank  that is to say  your father should
himself have inserted the date on which he signed the paper  do you
remember that?

nora  yes  i think i remember  

krogstad  then i gave you the bond to send by post to your father  is
that not so?

nora  yes 

krogstad  and you naturally did so at once  because five or six days
afterwards you brought me the bond with your father s signature  and
then i gave you the money 

nora  well  haven t i been paying it off regularly?

krogstad  fairly so  yes  but  to come back to the matter in hand  that
must have been a very trying time for you  mrs  helmer?

nora  it was  indeed 

krogstad  your father was very ill  wasn t he?

nora  he was very near his end 

krogstad  and died soon afterwards?

nora  yes 

krogstad  tell me  mrs  helmer  can you by any chance remember what day
your father died?  on what day of the month  i mean 

nora  papa died on the 29th of september 

krogstad  that is correct  i have ascertained it for myself  and  as
that is so  there is a discrepancy (taking a paper from his pocket)
which i cannot account for 

nora  what discrepancy? i don t know  

krogstad  the discrepancy consists  mrs  helmer  in the fact that your
father signed this bond three days after his death 

nora  what do you mean? i don t understand  

krogstad  your father died on the 29th of september  but  look here 
your father has dated his signature the 2nd of october  it is a
discrepancy  isn t it? (nora is silent ) can you explain it to me? (nora
is still silent ) it is a remarkable thing  too  that the words  2nd
of october   as well as the year  are not written in your father s
handwriting but in one that i think i know  well  of course it can be
explained  your father may have forgotten to date his signature  and
someone else may have dated it haphazard before they knew of his death 
there is no harm in that  it all depends on the signature of the name 
and that is genuine  i suppose  mrs  helmer? it was your father himself
who signed his name here?

nora (after a short pause  throws her head up and looks defiantly at
him)  no  it was not  it was i that wrote papa s name 

krogstad  are you aware that is a dangerous confession?

nora  in what way? you shall have your money soon 

krogstad  let me ask you a question  why did you not send the paper to
your father?

nora  it was impossible  papa was so ill  if i had asked him for his
signature  i should have had to tell him what the money was to be
used for  and when he was so ill himself i couldn t tell him that my
husband s life was in danger  it was impossible 

krogstad  it would have been better for you if you had given up your
trip abroad 

nora  no  that was impossible  that trip was to save my husband s life 
i couldn t give that up 

krogstad  but did it never occur to you that you were committing a fraud
on me?

nora  i couldn t take that into account  i didn t trouble myself about
you at all  i couldn t bear you  because you put so many heartless
difficulties in my way  although you knew what a dangerous condition my
husband was in 

krogstad  mrs  helmer  you evidently do not realise clearly what it is
that you have been guilty of  but i can assure you that my one false
step  which lost me all my reputation  was nothing more or nothing worse
than what you have done 

nora  you? do you ask me to believe that you were brave enough to run a
risk to save your wife s life?

krogstad  the law cares nothing about motives 

nora  then it must be a very foolish law 

krogstad  foolish or not  it is the law by which you will be judged  if
i produce this paper in court 

nora  i don t believe it  is a daughter not to be allowed to spare her
dying father anxiety and care? is a wife not to be allowed to save her
husband s life? i don t know much about law  but i am certain that there
must be laws permitting such things as that  have you no knowledge of
such laws  you who are a lawyer? you must be a very poor lawyer  mr 
krogstad 

krogstad  maybe  but matters of business  such business as you and i
have had together  do you think i don t understand that? very well  do
as you please  but let me tell you this  if i lose my position a second
time  you shall lose yours with me  (he bows  and goes out through the
hall )

nora (appears buried in thought for a short time  then tosses her head) 
nonsense! trying to frighten me like that!  i am not so silly as he
thinks  (begins to busy herself putting the children s things in order )
and yet  ? no  it s impossible! i did it for love s sake 

the children (in the doorway on the left)  mother  the stranger man has
gone out through the gate 

nora  yes  dears  i know  but  don t tell anyone about the stranger man 
do you hear? not even papa 

children  no  mother  but will you come and play again?

nora  no  no   not now 

children  but  mother  you promised us 

nora  yes  but i can t now  run away in  i have such a lot to do  run
away in  my sweet little darlings  (she gets them into the room by
degrees and shuts the door on them  then sits down on the sofa  takes
up a piece of needlework and sews a few stitches  but soon stops ) no!
(throws down the work  gets up  goes to the hall door and calls out )
helen! bring the tree in  (goes to the table on the left  opens a
drawer  and stops again ) no  no! it is quite impossible!

maid (coming in with the tree)  where shall i put it  ma am?

nora  here  in the middle of the floor 

maid  shall i get you anything else?

nora  no  thank you  i have all i want   exit maid  

nora (begins dressing the tree)  a candle here and flowers here  the
horrible man! it s all nonsense  there s nothing wrong  the tree
shall be splendid! i will do everything i can think of to please you 
torvald!  i will sing for you  dance for you  (helmer comes in with some
papers under his arm ) oh! are you back already?

helmer  yes  has anyone been here?

nora  here? no 

helmer  that is strange  i saw krogstad going out of the gate 

nora  did you? oh yes  i forgot  krogstad was here for a moment 

helmer  nora  i can see from your manner that he has been here begging
you to say a good word for him 

nora  yes 

helmer  and you were to appear to do it of your own accord  you were to
conceal from me the fact of his having been here  didn t he beg that of
you too?

nora  yes  torvald  but  

helmer  nora  nora  and you would be a party to that sort of thing? to
have any talk with a man like that  and give him any sort of promise?
and to tell me a lie into the bargain?

nora  a lie  ?

helmer  didn t you tell me no one had been here? (shakes his finger at
her ) my little songbird must never do that again  a songbird must have
a clean beak to chirp with  no false notes! (puts his arm round her
waist ) that is so  isn t it? yes  i am sure it is  (lets her go ) we
will say no more about it  (sits down by the stove ) how warm and snug
it is here! (turns over his papers )

nora (after a short pause  during which she busies herself with the
christmas tree ) torvald!

helmer  yes 

nora  i am looking forward tremendously to the fancy dress ball at the
stenborgs  the day after tomorrow 

helmer  and i am tremendously curious to see what you are going to
surprise me with 

nora  it was very silly of me to want to do that 

helmer  what do you mean?

nora  i can t hit upon anything that will do  everything i think of
seems so silly and insignificant 

helmer  does my little nora acknowledge that at last?

nora (standing behind his chair with her arms on the back of it)  are
you very busy  torvald?

helmer  well  

nora  what are all those papers?

helmer  bank business 

nora  already?

helmer  i have got authority from the retiring manager to undertake the
necessary changes in the staff and in the rearrangement of the work  and
i must make use of the christmas week for that  so as to have everything
in order for the new year 

nora  then that was why this poor krogstad  

helmer  hm!

nora (leans against the back of his chair and strokes his hair)  if you
hadn t been so busy i should have asked you a tremendously big favour 
torvald 

helmer  what is that? tell me 

nora  there is no one has such good taste as you  and i do so want to
look nice at the fancy dress ball  torvald  couldn t you take me in hand
and decide what i shall go as  and what sort of a dress i shall wear?

helmer  aha! so my obstinate little woman is obliged to get someone to
come to her rescue?

nora  yes  torvald  i can t get along a bit without your help 

helmer  very well  i will think it over  we shall manage to hit upon
something 

nora  that is nice of you  (goes to the christmas tree  a short pause )
how pretty the red flowers look    but  tell me  was it really something
very bad that this krogstad was guilty of?

helmer  he forged someone s name  have you any idea what that means?

nora  isn t it possible that he was driven to do it by necessity?

helmer  yes  or  as in so many cases  by imprudence  i am not so
heartless as to condemn a man altogether because of a single false step
of that kind 

nora  no  you wouldn t  would you  torvald?

helmer  many a man has been able to retrieve his character  if he has
openly confessed his fault and taken his punishment 

nora  punishment  ?

helmer  but krogstad did nothing of that sort  he got himself out of it
by a cunning trick  and that is why he has gone under altogether 

nora  but do you think it would  ?

helmer  just think how a guilty man like that has to lie and play the
hypocrite with every one  how he has to wear a mask in the presence of
those near and dear to him  even before his own wife and children  and
about the children  that is the most terrible part of it all  nora 

nora  how?

helmer  because such an atmosphere of lies infects and poisons the whole
life of a home  each breath the children take in such a house is full of
the germs of evil 

nora (coming nearer him)  are you sure of that?

helmer  my dear  i have often seen it in the course of my life as a
lawyer  almost everyone who has gone to the bad early in life has had a
deceitful mother 

nora  why do you only say  mother?

helmer  it seems most commonly to be the mother s influence  though
naturally a bad father s would have the same result  every lawyer
is familiar with the fact  this krogstad  now  has been persistently
poisoning his own children with lies and dissimulation  that is why i
say he has lost all moral character  (holds out his hands to her ) that
is why my sweet little nora must promise me not to plead his cause  give
me your hand on it  come  come  what is this? give me your hand  there
now  that s settled  i assure you it would be quite impossible for me to
work with him  i literally feel physically ill when i am in the company
of such people 

nora (takes her hand out of his and goes to the opposite side of the
christmas tree)  how hot it is in here  and i have such a lot to do 

helmer (getting up and putting his papers in order)  yes  and i must
try and read through some of these before dinner  and i must think about
your costume  too  and it is just possible i may have something ready
in gold paper to hang up on the tree  (puts his hand on her head ) my
precious little singing bird! (he goes into his room and shuts the door
after him )

nora (after a pause  whispers)  no  no  it isn t true  it s impossible 
it must be impossible 

(the nurse opens the door on the left )

nurse  the little ones are begging so hard to be allowed to come in to
mamma 

nora  no  no  no! don t let them come in to me! you stay with them 
anne 

nurse  very well  ma am  (shuts the door )

nora (pale with terror)  deprave my little children? poison my home? (a
short pause  then she tosses her head ) it s not true  it can t possibly
be true 




act ii

(the same scene   the christmas tree is in the corner by the piano 
stripped of its ornaments and with burnt down candle ends on its
dishevelled branches  nora s cloak and hat are lying on the sofa  she
is alone in the room  walking about uneasily  she stops by the sofa and
takes up her cloak )

nora (drops her cloak)  someone is coming now! (goes to the door and
listens ) no  it is no one  of course  no one will come today  christmas
day  nor tomorrow either  but  perhaps  (opens the door and looks out) 
no  nothing in the letterbox  it is quite empty  (comes forward )
what rubbish! of course he can t be in earnest about it  such a thing
couldn t happen  it is impossible  i have three little children 

(enter the nurse from the room on the left  carrying a big cardboard
box )

nurse  at last i have found the box with the fancy dress 

nora  thanks  put it on the table 

nurse (doing so)  but it is very much in want of mending 

nora  i should like to tear it into a hundred thousand pieces 

nurse  what an idea! it can easily be put in order  just a little
patience 

nora  yes  i will go and get mrs  linde to come and help me with it 

nurse  what  out again? in this horrible weather? you will catch cold 
ma am  and make yourself ill 

nora  well  worse than that might happen  how are the children?

nurse  the poor little souls are playing with their christmas presents 
but  

nora  do they ask much for me?

nurse  you see  they are so accustomed to have their mamma with them 

nora  yes  but  nurse  i shall not be able to be so much with them now
as i was before 

nurse  oh well  young children easily get accustomed to anything 

nora  do you think so? do you think they would forget their mother if
she went away altogether?

nurse  good heavens!  went away altogether?

nora  nurse  i want you to tell me something i have often wondered
about  how could you have the heart to put your own child out among
strangers?

nurse  i was obliged to  if i wanted to be little nora s nurse 

nora  yes  but how could you be willing to do it?

nurse  what  when i was going to get such a good place by it? a poor
girl who has got into trouble should be glad to  besides  that wicked
man didn t do a single thing for me 

nora  but i suppose your daughter has quite forgotten you 

nurse  no  indeed she hasn t  she wrote to me when she was confirmed 
and when she was married 

nora (putting her arms round her neck)  dear old anne  you were a good
mother to me when i was little 

nurse  little nora  poor dear  had no other mother but me 

nora  and if my little ones had no other mother  i am sure you
would  what nonsense i am talking! (opens the box ) go in to them 
now i must    you will see tomorrow how charming i shall look 

nurse  i am sure there will be no one at the ball so charming as you 
ma am  (goes into the room on the left )

nora (begins to unpack the box  but soon pushes it away from her)  if
only i dared go out  if only no one would come  if only i could be sure
nothing would happen here in the meantime  stuff and nonsense! no one
will come  only i mustn t think about it  i will brush my muff  what
lovely  lovely gloves! out of my thoughts  out of my thoughts! one 
two  three  four  five  six   (screams ) ah! there is someone coming   
(makes a movement towards the door  but stands irresolute )

(enter mrs  linde from the hall  where she has taken off her cloak and
hat )

nora  oh  it s you  christine  there is no one else out there  is there?
how good of you to come!

mrs  linde  i heard you were up asking for me 

nora  yes  i was passing by  as a matter of fact  it is something
you could help me with  let us sit down here on the sofa  look here 
tomorrow evening there is to be a fancy dress ball at the stenborgs  
who live above us  and torvald wants me to go as a neapolitan
fisher girl  and dance the tarantella that i learned at capri 

mrs  linde  i see  you are going to keep up the character 

nora  yes  torvald wants me to  look  here is the dress  torvald had it
made for me there  but now it is all so torn  and i haven t any idea  

mrs  linde  we will easily put that right  it is only some of the
trimming come unsewn here and there  needle and thread? now then  that s
all we want 

nora  it is nice of you 

mrs  linde (sewing)  so you are going to be dressed up tomorrow nora 
i will tell you what  i shall come in for a moment and see you in
your fine feathers  but i have completely forgotten to thank you for a
delightful evening yesterday 

nora (gets up  and crosses the stage)  well  i don t think yesterday was
as pleasant as usual  you ought to have come to town a little earlier 
christine  certainly torvald does understand how to make a house dainty
and attractive 

mrs  linde  and so do you  it seems to me  you are not your father s
daughter for nothing  but tell me  is doctor rank always as depressed as
he was yesterday?

nora  no  yesterday it was very noticeable  i must tell you that he
suffers from a very dangerous disease  he has consumption of the spine 
poor creature  his father was a horrible man who committed all sorts
of excesses  and that is why his son was sickly from childhood  do you
understand?

mrs  linde (dropping her sewing)  but  my dearest nora  how do you know
anything about such things?

nora (walking about)  pooh! when you have three children  you get visits
now and then from  from married women  who know something of medical
matters  and they talk about one thing and another 

mrs  linde (goes on sewing  a short silence)  does doctor rank come here
everyday?

nora  everyday regularly  he is torvald s most intimate friend  and a
great friend of mine too  he is just like one of the family 

mrs  linde  but tell me this  is he perfectly sincere? i mean  isn t he
the kind of man that is very anxious to make himself agreeable?

nora  not in the least  what makes you think that?

mrs  linde  when you introduced him to me yesterday  he declared he had
often heard my name mentioned in this house  but afterwards i noticed
that your husband hadn t the slightest idea who i was  so how could
doctor rank  ?

nora  that is quite right  christine  torvald is so absurdly fond of me
that he wants me absolutely to himself  as he says  at first he used
to seem almost jealous if i mentioned any of the dear folk at home  so
naturally i gave up doing so  but i often talk about such things with
doctor rank  because he likes hearing about them 

mrs  linde  listen to me  nora  you are still very like a child in many
things  and i am older than you in many ways and have a little more
experience  let me tell you this  you ought to make an end of it with
doctor rank 

nora  what ought i to make an end of?

mrs  linde  of two things  i think  yesterday you talked some nonsense
about a rich admirer who was to leave you money  

nora  an admirer who doesn t exist  unfortunately! but what then?

mrs  linde  is doctor rank a man of means?

nora  yes  he is 

mrs  linde  and has no one to provide for?

nora  no  no one  but  

mrs  linde  and comes here everyday?

nora  yes  i told you so 

mrs  linde  but how can this well bred man be so tactless?

nora  i don t understand you at all 

mrs  linde  don t prevaricate  nora  do you suppose i don t guess who
lent you the two hundred and fifty pounds?

nora  are you out of your senses? how can you think of such a thing! a
friend of ours  who comes here everyday! do you realise what a horribly
painful position that would be?

mrs  linde  then it really isn t he?

nora  no  certainly not  it would never have entered into my head for
a moment  besides  he had no money to lend then  he came into his money
afterwards 

mrs  linde  well  i think that was lucky for you  my dear nora 

nora  no  it would never have come into my head to ask doctor rank 
although i am quite sure that if i had asked him  

mrs  linde  but of course you won t 

nora  of course not  i have no reason to think it could possibly be
necessary  but i am quite sure that if i told doctor rank  

mrs  linde  behind your husband s back?

nora  i must make an end of it with the other one  and that will be
behind his back too  i must make an end of it with him 

mrs  linde  yes  that is what i told you yesterday  but  

nora (walking up and down)  a man can put a thing like that straight
much easier than a woman  

mrs  linde  one s husband  yes 

nora  nonsense! (standing still ) when you pay off a debt you get your
bond back  don t you?

mrs  linde  yes  as a matter of course 

nora  and can tear it into a hundred thousand pieces  and burn it
up  the nasty dirty paper!

mrs  linde (looks hard at her  lays down her sewing and gets up slowly) 
nora  you are concealing something from me 

nora  do i look as if i were?

mrs  linde  something has happened to you since yesterday morning  nora 
what is it?

nora (going nearer to her)  christine! (listens ) hush! there s torvald
come home  do you mind going in to the children for the present? torvald
can t bear to see dressmaking going on  let anne help you 

mrs  linde (gathering some of the things together)  certainly  but i am
not going away from here until we have had it out with one another  (she
goes into the room on the left  as helmer comes in from the hall )

nora (going up to helmer)  i have wanted you so much  torvald dear 

helmer  was that the dressmaker?

nora  no  it was christine  she is helping me to put my dress in order 
you will see i shall look quite smart 

helmer  wasn t that a happy thought of mine  now?

nora  splendid! but don t you think it is nice of me  too  to do as you
wish?

helmer  nice?  because you do as your husband wishes? well  well  you
little rogue  i am sure you did not mean it in that way  but i am
not going to disturb you  you will want to be trying on your dress  i
expect 

nora  i suppose you are going to work 

helmer  yes  (shows her a bundle of papers ) look at that  i have just
been into the bank  (turns to go into his room )

nora  torvald 

helmer  yes 

nora  if your little squirrel were to ask you for something very  very
prettily  ?

helmer  what then?

nora  would you do it?

helmer  i should like to hear what it is  first 

nora  your squirrel would run about and do all her tricks if you would
be nice  and do what she wants 

helmer  speak plainly 

nora  your skylark would chirp about in every room  with her song rising
and falling  

helmer  well  my skylark does that anyhow 

nora  i would play the fairy and dance for you in the moonlight 
torvald 

helmer  nora  you surely don t mean that request you made to me this
morning?

nora (going near him)  yes  torvald  i beg you so earnestly  

helmer  have you really the courage to open up that question again?

nora  yes  dear  you must do as i ask  you must let krogstad keep his
post in the bank 

helmer  my dear nora  it is his post that i have arranged mrs  linde
shall have 

nora  yes  you have been awfully kind about that  but you could just as
well dismiss some other clerk instead of krogstad 

helmer  this is simply incredible obstinacy! because you chose to give
him a thoughtless promise that you would speak for him  i am expected
to  

nora  that isn t the reason  torvald  it is for your own sake  this
fellow writes in the most scurrilous newspapers  you have told me so
yourself  he can do you an unspeakable amount of harm  i am frightened
to death of him  

helmer  ah  i understand  it is recollections of the past that scare
you 

nora  what do you mean?

helmer  naturally you are thinking of your father 

nora  yes  yes  of course  just recall to your mind what these malicious
creatures wrote in the papers about papa  and how horribly they
slandered him  i believe they would have procured his dismissal if the
department had not sent you over to inquire into it  and if you had not
been so kindly disposed and helpful to him 

helmer  my little nora  there is an important difference between your
father and me  your father s reputation as a public official was not
above suspicion  mine is  and i hope it will continue to be so  as long
as i hold my office 

nora  you never can tell what mischief these men may contrive  we ought
to be so well off  so snug and happy here in our peaceful home  and have
no cares  you and i and the children  torvald! that is why i beg you so
earnestly  

helmer  and it is just by interceding for him that you make it
impossible for me to keep him  it is already known at the bank that i
mean to dismiss krogstad  is it to get about now that the new manager
has changed his mind at his wife s bidding  

nora  and what if it did?

helmer  of course!  if only this obstinate little person can get her
way! do you suppose i am going to make myself ridiculous before my whole
staff  to let people think that i am a man to be swayed by all sorts of
outside influence? i should very soon feel the consequences of it  i can
tell you! and besides  there is one thing that makes it quite impossible
for me to have krogstad in the bank as long as i am manager 

nora  whatever is that?

helmer  his moral failings i might perhaps have overlooked  if
necessary  

nora  yes  you could  couldn t you?

helmer  and i hear he is a good worker  too  but i knew him when we
were boys  it was one of those rash friendships that so often prove an
incubus in afterlife  i may as well tell you plainly  we were once on
very intimate terms with one another  but this tactless fellow lays no
restraint on himself when other people are present  on the contrary 
he thinks it gives him the right to adopt a familiar tone with me  and
every minute it is  i say  helmer  old fellow!  and that sort of thing 
i assure you it is extremely painful for me  he would make my position
in the bank intolerable 

nora  torvald  i don t believe you mean that 

helmer  don t you? why not?

nora  because it is such a narrow minded way of looking at things 

helmer  what are you saying? narrow minded? do you think i am
narrow minded?

nora  no  just the opposite  dear  and it is exactly for that reason 

helmer  it s the same thing  you say my point of view is narrow minded 
so i must be so too  narrow minded! very well  i must put an end to
this  (goes to the hall door and calls ) helen!

nora  what are you going to do?

helmer (looking among his papers)  settle it  (enter maid ) look here 
take this letter and go downstairs with it at once  find a messenger and
tell him to deliver it  and be quick  the address is on it  and here is
the money 

maid  very well  sir  (exit with the letter )

helmer (putting his papers together)  now then  little miss obstinate 

nora (breathlessly)  torvald  what was that letter?

helmer  krogstad s dismissal 

nora  call her back  torvald! there is still time  oh torvald  call her
back! do it for my sake  for your own sake  for the children s sake! do
you hear me  torvald? call her back! you don t know what that letter can
bring upon us 

helmer  it s too late 

nora  yes  it s too late 

helmer  my dear nora  i can forgive the anxiety you are in  although
really it is an insult to me  it is  indeed  isn t it an insult to think
that i should be afraid of a starving quill driver s vengeance? but i
forgive you nevertheless  because it is such eloquent witness to your
great love for me  (takes her in his arms ) and that is as it should be 
my own darling nora  come what will  you may be sure i shall have both
courage and strength if they be needed  you will see i am man enough to
take everything upon myself 

nora (in a horror stricken voice)  what do you mean by that?

helmer  everything  i say  

nora (recovering herself)  you will never have to do that 

helmer  that s right  well  we will share it  nora  as man and wife
should  that is how it shall be  (caressing her ) are you content now?
there! there!  not these frightened dove s eyes! the whole thing is only
the wildest fancy!  now  you must go and play through the tarantella and
practise with your tambourine  i shall go into the inner office and shut
the door  and i shall hear nothing  you can make as much noise as you
please  (turns back at the door ) and when rank comes  tell him where he
will find me  (nods to her  takes his papers and goes into his room  and
shuts the door after him )

nora (bewildered with anxiety  stands as if rooted to the spot  and
whispers)  he was capable of doing it  he will do it  he will do it in
spite of everything   no  not that! never  never! anything rather than
that! oh  for some help  some way out of it! (the door bell rings )
doctor rank! anything rather than that  anything  whatever it is! (she
puts her hands over her face  pulls herself together  goes to the door
and opens it  rank is standing without  hanging up his coat  during the
following dialogue it begins to grow dark )

nora  good day  doctor rank  i knew your ring  but you mustn t go in to
torvald now  i think he is busy with something 

rank  and you?

nora (brings him in and shuts the door after him)  oh  you know very
well i always have time for you 

rank  thank you  i shall make use of as much of it as i can 

nora  what do you mean by that? as much of it as you can?

rank  well  does that alarm you?

nora  it was such a strange way of putting it  is anything likely to
happen?

rank  nothing but what i have long been prepared for  but i certainly
didn t expect it to happen so soon 

nora (gripping him by the arm)  what have you found out? doctor rank 
you must tell me 

rank (sitting down by the stove)  it is all up with me  and it can t be
helped 

nora (with a sigh of relief)  is it about yourself?

rank  who else? it is no use lying to one s self  i am the most wretched
of all my patients  mrs  helmer  lately i have been taking stock of my
internal economy  bankrupt! probably within a month i shall lie rotting
in the churchyard 

nora  what an ugly thing to say!

rank  the thing itself is cursedly ugly  and the worst of it is that i
shall have to face so much more that is ugly before that  i shall only
make one more examination of myself  when i have done that  i shall know
pretty certainly when it will be that the horrors of dissolution will
begin  there is something i want to tell you  helmer s refined nature
gives him an unconquerable disgust at everything that is ugly  i won t
have him in my sick room 

nora  oh  but  doctor rank  

rank  i won t have him there  not on any account  i bar my door to him 
as soon as i am quite certain that the worst has come  i shall send
you my card with a black cross on it  and then you will know that the
loathsome end has begun 

nora  you are quite absurd today  and i wanted you so much to be in a
really good humour 

rank  with death stalking beside me?  to have to pay this penalty for
another man s sin? is there any justice in that? and in every single
family  in one way or another  some such inexorable retribution is being
exacted  

nora (putting her hands over her ears)  rubbish! do talk of something
cheerful 

rank  oh  it s a mere laughing matter  the whole thing  my poor innocent
spine has to suffer for my father s youthful amusements 

nora (sitting at the table on the left)  i suppose you mean that he was
too partial to asparagus and pate de foie gras  don t you?

rank  yes  and to truffles 

nora  truffles  yes  and oysters too  i suppose?

rank  oysters  of course  that goes without saying 

nora  and heaps of port and champagne  it is sad that all these nice
things should take their revenge on our bones 

rank  especially that they should revenge themselves on the unlucky
bones of those who have not had the satisfaction of enjoying them 

nora  yes  that s the saddest part of it all 

rank (with a searching look at her)  hm!  

nora (after a short pause)  why did you smile?

rank  no  it was you that laughed 

nora  no  it was you that smiled  doctor rank!

rank (rising)  you are a greater rascal than i thought 

nora  i am in a silly mood today 

rank  so it seems 

nora (putting her hands on his shoulders)  dear  dear doctor rank  death
mustn t take you away from torvald and me 

rank  it is a loss you would easily recover from  those who are gone are
soon forgotten 

nora (looking at him anxiously)  do you believe that?

rank  people form new ties  and then  

nora  who will form new ties?

rank  both you and helmer  when i am gone  you yourself are already on
the high road to it  i think  what did that mrs  linde want here last
night?

nora  oho!  you don t mean to say you are jealous of poor christine?

rank  yes  i am  she will be my successor in this house  when i am done
for  this woman will  

nora  hush! don t speak so loud  she is in that room 

rank  today again  there  you see 

nora  she has only come to sew my dress for me  bless my soul  how
unreasonable you are! (sits down on the sofa ) be nice now  doctor rank 
and tomorrow you will see how beautifully i shall dance  and you can
imagine i am doing it all for you  and for torvald too  of course 
(takes various things out of the box ) doctor rank  come and sit down
here  and i will show you something 

rank (sitting down)  what is it?

nora  just look at those!

rank  silk stockings 

nora  flesh coloured  aren t they lovely? it is so dark here now  but
tomorrow    no  no  no! you must only look at the feet  oh well  you may
have leave to look at the legs too 

rank  hm!  nora  why are you looking so critical? don t you think they
will fit me?

rank  i have no means of forming an opinion about that 

nora (looks at him for a moment)  for shame! (hits him lightly on the
ear with the stockings ) that s to punish you  (folds them up again )

rank  and what other nice things am i to be allowed to see?

nora  not a single thing more  for being so naughty  (she looks among
the things  humming to herself )

rank (after a short silence)  when i am sitting here  talking to you as
intimately as this  i cannot imagine for a moment what would have become
of me if i had never come into this house 

nora (smiling)  i believe you do feel thoroughly at home with us 

rank (in a lower voice  looking straight in front of him)  and to be
obliged to leave it all  

nora  nonsense  you are not going to leave it 

rank (as before)  and not be able to leave behind one the slightest
token of one s gratitude  scarcely even a fleeting regret  nothing but
an empty place which the first comer can fill as well as any other 

nora  and if i asked you now for a  ? no!

rank  for what?

nora  for a big proof of your friendship  

rank  yes  yes!

nora  i mean a tremendously big favour  

rank  would you really make me so happy for once?

nora  ah  but you don t know what it is yet 

rank  no  but tell me 

nora  i really can t  doctor rank  it is something out of all reason  it
means advice  and help  and a favour  

rank  the bigger a thing it is the better  i can t conceive what it is
you mean  do tell me  haven t i your confidence?

nora  more than anyone else  i know you are my truest and best friend 
and so i will tell you what it is  well  doctor rank  it is something
you must help me to prevent  you know how devotedly  how inexpressibly
deeply torvald loves me  he would never for a moment hesitate to give
his life for me 

rank (leaning towards her)  nora  do you think he is the only one  ?

nora (with a slight start)  the only one  ?

rank  the only one who would gladly give his life for your sake 

nora (sadly)  is that it?

rank  i was determined you should know it before i went away  and there
will never be a better opportunity than this  now you know it  nora  and
now you know  too  that you can trust me as you would trust no one else 

nora (rises  deliberately and quietly)  let me pass 

rank (makes room for her to pass him  but sits still)  nora!

nora (at the hall door)  helen  bring in the lamp  (goes over to the
stove ) dear doctor rank  that was really horrid of you 

rank  to have loved you as much as anyone else does? was that horrid?

nora  no  but to go and tell me so  there was really no need  

rank  what do you mean? did you know  ? (maid enters with lamp  puts it
down on the table  and goes out ) nora  mrs  helmer  tell me  had you
any idea of this?

nora  oh  how do i know whether i had or whether i hadn t? i really
can t tell you  to think you could be so clumsy  doctor rank! we were
getting on so nicely 

rank  well  at all events you know now that you can command me  body and
soul  so won t you speak out?

nora (looking at him)  after what happened?

rank  i beg you to let me know what it is 

nora  i can t tell you anything now 

rank  yes  yes  you mustn t punish me in that way  let me have
permission to do for you whatever a man may do 

nora  you can do nothing for me now  besides  i really don t need any
help at all  you will find that the whole thing is merely fancy on my
part  it really is so  of course it is! (sits down in the rocking chair 
and looks at him with a smile ) you are a nice sort of man  doctor
rank!  don t you feel ashamed of yourself  now the lamp has come?

rank  not a bit  but perhaps i had better go  for ever?

nora  no  indeed  you shall not  of course you must come here just as
before  you know very well torvald can t do without you 

rank  yes  but you?

nora  oh  i am always tremendously pleased when you come 

rank  it is just that  that put me on the wrong track  you are a riddle
to me  i have often thought that you would almost as soon be in my
company as in helmer s 

nora  yes  you see there are some people one loves best  and others whom
one would almost always rather have as companions 

rank  yes  there is something in that 

nora  when i was at home  of course i loved papa best  but i always
thought it tremendous fun if i could steal down into the maids  room 
because they never moralised at all  and talked to each other about such
entertaining things 

rank  i see  it is their place i have taken 

nora (jumping up and going to him)  oh  dear  nice doctor rank  i never
meant that at all  but surely you can understand that being with torvald
is a little like being with papa  (enter maid from the hall )

maid  if you please  ma am  (whispers and hands her a card )

nora (glancing at the card)  oh! (puts it in her pocket )

rank  is there anything wrong?

nora  no  no  not in the least  it is only something  it is my new
dress  

rank  what? your dress is lying there 

nora  oh  yes  that one  but this is another  i ordered it  torvald
mustn t know about it  

rank  oho! then that was the great secret 

nora  of course  just go in to him  he is sitting in the inner room 
keep him as long as  

rank  make your mind easy  i won t let him escape 

(goes into helmer s room )

nora (to the maid)  and he is standing waiting in the kitchen?

maid  yes  he came up the back stairs 

nora  but didn t you tell him no one was in?

maid  yes  but it was no good 

nora  he won t go away?

maid  no  he says he won t until he has seen you  ma am 

nora  well  let him come in  but quietly  helen  you mustn t say
anything about it to anyone  it is a surprise for my husband 

maid  yes  ma am  i quite understand  (exit )

nora  this dreadful thing is going to happen! it will happen in spite of
me! no  no  no  it can t happen  it shan t happen! (she bolts the door
of helmer s room  the maid opens the hall door for krogstad and shuts it
after him  he is wearing a fur coat  high boots and a fur cap )

nora (advancing towards him)  speak low  my husband is at home 

krogstad  no matter about that 

nora  what do you want of me?

krogstad  an explanation of something 

nora  make haste then  what is it?

krogstad  you know  i suppose  that i have got my dismissal 

nora  i couldn t prevent it  mr  krogstad  i fought as hard as i could
on your side  but it was no good 

krogstad  does your husband love you so little  then? he knows what i
can expose you to  and yet he ventures  

nora  how can you suppose that he has any knowledge of the sort?

krogstad  i didn t suppose so at all  it would not be the least like our
dear torvald helmer to show so much courage  

nora  mr  krogstad  a little respect for my husband  please 

krogstad  certainly  all the respect he deserves  but since you have
kept the matter so carefully to yourself  i make bold to suppose that
you have a little clearer idea  than you had yesterday  of what it
actually is that you have done?

nora  more than you could ever teach me 

krogstad  yes  such a bad lawyer as i am 

nora  what is it you want of me?

krogstad  only to see how you were  mrs  helmer  i have been thinking
about you all day long  a mere cashier  a quill driver  a  well  a man
like me  even he has a little of what is called feeling  you know 

nora  show it  then  think of my little children 

krogstad  have you and your husband thought of mine? but never mind
about that  i only wanted to tell you that you need not take this matter
too seriously  in the first place there will be no accusation made on my
part 

nora  no  of course not  i was sure of that 

krogstad  the whole thing can be arranged amicably  there is no reason
why anyone should know anything about it  it will remain a secret
between us three 

nora  my husband must never get to know anything about it 

krogstad  how will you be able to prevent it? am i to understand that
you can pay the balance that is owing?

nora  no  not just at present 

krogstad  or perhaps that you have some expedient for raising the money
soon?

nora  no expedient that i mean to make use of 

krogstad  well  in any case  it would have been of no use to you now  if
you stood there with ever so much money in your hand  i would never part
with your bond 

nora  tell me what purpose you mean to put it to 

krogstad  i shall only preserve it  keep it in my possession  no one who
is not concerned in the matter shall have the slightest hint of it  so
that if the thought of it has driven you to any desperate resolution  

nora  it has 

krogstad  if you had it in your mind to run away from your home  

nora  i had 

krogstad  or even something worse  

nora  how could you know that?

krogstad  give up the idea 

nora  how did you know i had thought of that?

krogstad  most of us think of that at first  i did  too  but i hadn t
the courage 

nora (faintly)  no more had i 

krogstad (in a tone of relief)  no  that s it  isn t it  you hadn t the
courage either?

nora  no  i haven t  i haven t 

krogstad  besides  it would have been a great piece of folly  once the
first storm at home is over    i have a letter for your husband in my
pocket 

nora  telling him everything?

krogstad  in as lenient a manner as i possibly could 

nora (quickly)  he mustn t get the letter  tear it up  i will find some
means of getting money 

krogstad  excuse me  mrs  helmer  but i think i told you just now  

nora  i am not speaking of what i owe you  tell me what sum you are
asking my husband for  and i will get the money 

krogstad  i am not asking your husband for a penny 

nora  what do you want  then?

krogstad  i will tell you  i want to rehabilitate myself  mrs  helmer  i
want to get on  and in that your husband must help me  for the last year
and a half i have not had a hand in anything dishonourable  amid all
that time i have been struggling in most restricted circumstances  i was
content to work my way up step by step  now i am turned out  and i am
not going to be satisfied with merely being taken into favour again 
i want to get on  i tell you  i want to get into the bank again  in a
higher position  your husband must make a place for me  

nora  that he will never do!

krogstad  he will  i know him  he dare not protest  and as soon as i am
in there again with him  then you will see! within a year i shall be the
manager s right hand  it will be nils krogstad and not torvald helmer
who manages the bank 

nora  that s a thing you will never see!

krogstad  do you mean that you will  ?

nora  i have courage enough for it now 

krogstad  oh  you can t frighten me  a fine  spoilt lady like you  

nora  you will see  you will see 

krogstad  under the ice  perhaps? down into the cold  coal black water?
and then  in the spring  to float up to the surface  all horrible and
unrecognisable  with your hair fallen out  

nora  you can t frighten me 

krogstad  nor you me  people don t do such things  mrs  helmer  besides 
what use would it be? i should have him completely in my power all the
same 

nora  afterwards? when i am no longer  

krogstad  have you forgotten that it is i who have the keeping of your
reputation? (nora stands speechlessly looking at him ) well  now  i have
warned you  do not do anything foolish  when helmer has had my letter 
i shall expect a message from him  and be sure you remember that it is
your husband himself who has forced me into such ways as this again  i
will never forgive him for that  goodbye  mrs  helmer  (exit through the
hall )

nora (goes to the hall door  opens it slightly and listens ) he is
going  he is not putting the letter in the box  oh no  no! that s
impossible! (opens the door by degrees ) what is that? he is standing
outside  he is not going downstairs  is he hesitating? can he  ? (a
letter drops into the box  then krogstad s footsteps are heard  until
they die away as he goes downstairs  nora utters a stifled cry  and runs
across the room to the table by the sofa  a short pause )

nora  in the letter box  (steals across to the hall door ) there it
lies  torvald  torvald  there is no hope for us now!

(mrs  linde comes in from the room on the left  carrying the dress )

mrs  linde  there  i can t see anything more to mend now  would you like
to try it on  ?

nora (in a hoarse whisper)  christine  come here 

mrs  linde (throwing the dress down on the sofa)  what is the matter
with you? you look so agitated!

nora  come here  do you see that letter? there  look  you can see it
through the glass in the letter box 

mrs  linde  yes  i see it 

nora  that letter is from krogstad 

mrs  linde  nora  it was krogstad who lent you the money!

nora  yes  and now torvald will know all about it 

mrs  linde  believe me  nora  that s the best thing for both of you 

nora  you don t know all  i forged a name 

mrs  linde  good heavens  !

nora  i only want to say this to you  christine  you must be my witness 

mrs  linde  your witness? what do you mean? what am i to  ?

nora  if i should go out of my mind  and it might easily happen  

mrs  linde  nora!

nora  or if anything else should happen to me  anything  for instance 
that might prevent my being here  

mrs  linde  nora! nora! you are quite out of your mind 

nora  and if it should happen that there were some one who wanted to
take all the responsibility  all the blame  you understand  

mrs  linde  yes  yes  but how can you suppose  ?

nora  then you must be my witness  that it is not true  christine  i am
not out of my mind at all  i am in my right senses now  and i tell you
no one else has known anything about it  i  and i alone  did the whole
thing  remember that 

mrs  linde  i will  indeed  but i don t understand all this 

nora  how should you understand it? a wonderful thing is going to
happen!

mrs  linde  a wonderful thing?

nora  yes  a wonderful thing!  but it is so terrible  christine  it
mustn t happen  not for all the world 

mrs  linde  i will go at once and see krogstad 

nora  don t go to him  he will do you some harm 

mrs  linde  there was a time when he would gladly do anything for my
sake 

nora  he?

mrs  linde  where does he live?

nora  how should i know  ? yes (feeling in her pocket)  here is his
card  but the letter  the letter  !

helmer (calls from his room  knocking at the door)  nora! nora (cries
out anxiously)  oh  what s that? what do you want?

helmer  don t be so frightened  we are not coming in  you have locked
the door  are you trying on your dress?

nora  yes  that s it  i look so nice  torvald 

mrs  linde (who has read the card)  i see he lives at the corner here 

nora  yes  but it s no use  it is hopeless  the letter is lying there in
the box 

mrs  linde  and your husband keeps the key?

nora  yes  always 

mrs  linde  krogstad must ask for his letter back unread  he must find
some pretence  

nora  but it is just at this time that torvald generally  

mrs  linde  you must delay him  go in to him in the meantime  i will
come back as soon as i can  (she goes out hurriedly through the hall
door )

nora (goes to helmer s door  opens it and peeps in)  torvald!

helmer (from the inner room)  well? may i venture at last to come into
my own room again? come along  rank  now you will see   (halting in the
doorway ) but what is this?

nora  what is what  dear?

helmer  rank led me to expect a splendid transformation 

rank (in the doorway)  i understood so  but evidently i was mistaken 

nora  yes  nobody is to have the chance of admiring me in my dress until
tomorrow 

helmer  but  my dear nora  you look so worn out  have you been
practising too much?

nora  no  i have not practised at all 

helmer  but you will need to  

nora  yes  indeed i shall  torvald  but i can t get on a bit without you
to help me  i have absolutely forgotten the whole thing 

helmer  oh  we will soon work it up again 

nora  yes  help me  torvald  promise that you will! i am so nervous
about it  all the people    you must give yourself up to me entirely
this evening  not the tiniest bit of business  you mustn t even take a
pen in your hand  will you promise  torvald dear?

helmer  i promise  this evening i will be wholly and absolutely at your
service  you helpless little mortal  ah  by the way  first of all i will
just  (goes towards the hall door )

nora  what are you going to do there?

helmer  only see if any letters have come 

nora  no  no! don t do that  torvald!

helmer  why not?

nora  torvald  please don t  there is nothing there 

helmer  well  let me look  (turns to go to the letter box  nora  at
the piano  plays the first bars of the tarantella  helmer stops in the
doorway ) aha!

nora  i can t dance tomorrow if i don t practise with you 

helmer (going up to her)  are you really so afraid of it  dear?

nora  yes  so dreadfully afraid of it  let me practise at once  there
is time now  before we go to dinner  sit down and play for me  torvald
dear  criticise me  and correct me as you play 

helmer  with great pleasure  if you wish me to  (sits down at the
piano )

nora (takes out of the box a tambourine and a long variegated shawl  she
hastily drapes the shawl round her  then she springs to the front of the
stage and calls out)  now play for me! i am going to dance!

(helmer plays and nora dances  rank stands by the piano behind helmer 
and looks on )

helmer (as he plays)  slower  slower!

nora  i can t do it any other way 

helmer  not so violently  nora!

nora  this is the way 

helmer (stops playing)  no  no  that is not a bit right 

nora (laughing and swinging the tambourine)  didn t i tell you so?

rank  let me play for her 

helmer (getting up)  yes  do  i can correct her better then 

(rank sits down at the piano and plays  nora dances more and more
wildly  helmer has taken up a position beside the stove  and during her
dance gives her frequent instructions  she does not seem to hear him 
her hair comes down and falls over her shoulders  she pays no attention
to it  but goes on dancing  enter mrs  linde )

mrs  linde (standing as if spell bound in the doorway)  oh!  

nora (as she dances)  such fun  christine!

helmer  my dear darling nora  you are dancing as if your life depended
on it 

nora  so it does 

helmer  stop  rank  this is sheer madness  stop  i tell you! (rank stops
playing  and nora suddenly stands still  helmer goes up to her ) i could
never have believed it  you have forgotten everything i taught you 

nora (throwing away the tambourine)  there  you see 

helmer  you will want a lot of coaching 

nora  yes  you see how much i need it  you must coach me up to the last
minute  promise me that  torvald!

helmer  you can depend on me 

nora  you must not think of anything but me  either today or tomorrow 
you mustn t open a single letter  not even open the letter box  

helmer  ah  you are still afraid of that fellow  

nora  yes  indeed i am 

helmer  nora  i can tell from your looks that there is a letter from him
lying there 

nora  i don t know  i think there is  but you must not read anything
of that kind now  nothing horrid must come between us until this is all
over 

rank (whispers to helmer)  you mustn t contradict her 

helmer (taking her in his arms)  the child shall have her way  but
tomorrow night  after you have danced  

nora  then you will be free  (the maid appears in the doorway to the
right )

maid  dinner is served  ma am 

nora  we will have champagne  helen 

maid  very good  ma am   exit 

helmer  hullo!  are we going to have a banquet?

nora  yes  a champagne banquet until the small hours  (calls out ) and a
few macaroons  helen  lots  just for once!

helmer  come  come  don t be so wild and nervous  be my own little
skylark  as you used 

nora  yes  dear  i will  but go in now and you too  doctor rank 
christine  you must help me to do up my hair 

rank (whispers to helmer as they go out)  i suppose there is
nothing  she is not expecting anything?

helmer  far from it  my dear fellow  it is simply nothing more than this
childish nervousness i was telling you of  (they go into the right hand
room )

nora  well!

mrs  linde  gone out of town 

nora  i could tell from your face 

mrs  linde  he is coming home tomorrow evening  i wrote a note for him 

nora  you should have let it alone  you must prevent nothing  after all 
it is splendid to be waiting for a wonderful thing to happen 

mrs  linde  what is it that you are waiting for?

nora  oh  you wouldn t understand  go in to them  i will come in a
moment  (mrs  linde goes into the dining room  nora stands still for a
little while  as if to compose herself  then she looks at her watch )
five o clock  seven hours until midnight  and then four and twenty hours
until the next midnight  then the tarantella will be over  twenty four
and seven? thirty one hours to live 

helmer (from the doorway on the right)  where s my little skylark?

nora (going to him with her arms outstretched)  here she is!




act iii

(the same scene   the table has been placed in the middle of the stage 
with chairs around it  a lamp is burning on the table  the door into the
hall stands open  dance music is heard in the room above  mrs  linde is
sitting at the table idly turning over the leaves of a book  she tries
to read  but does not seem able to collect her thoughts  every now and
then she listens intently for a sound at the outer door )

mrs  linde (looking at her watch)  not yet  and the time is nearly up 
if only he does not    (listens again ) ah  there he is  (goes into the
hall and opens the outer door carefully  light footsteps are heard on
the stairs  she whispers ) come in  there is no one here 

krogstad (in the doorway)  i found a note from you at home  what does
this mean?

mrs  linde  it is absolutely necessary that i should have a talk with
you 

krogstad  really? and is it absolutely necessary that it should be here?

mrs  linde  it is impossible where i live  there is no private entrance
to my rooms  come in  we are quite alone  the maid is asleep  and the
helmers are at the dance upstairs 

krogstad (coming into the room)  are the helmers really at a dance
tonight?

mrs  linde  yes  why not?

krogstad  certainly  why not?

mrs  linde  now  nils  let us have a talk 

krogstad  can we two have anything to talk about?

mrs  linde  we have a great deal to talk about 

krogstad  i shouldn t have thought so 

mrs  linde  no  you have never properly understood me 

krogstad  was there anything else to understand except what was obvious
to all the world  a heartless woman jilts a man when a more lucrative
chance turns up?

mrs  linde  do you believe i am as absolutely heartless as all that? and
do you believe that i did it with a light heart?

krogstad  didn t you?

mrs  linde  nils  did you really think that?

krogstad  if it were as you say  why did you write to me as you did at
the time?

mrs  linde  i could do nothing else  as i had to break with you  it was
my duty also to put an end to all that you felt for me 

krogstad (wringing his hands)  so that was it  and all this  only for
the sake of money!

mrs  linde  you must not forget that i had a helpless mother and two
little brothers  we couldn t wait for you  nils  your prospects seemed
hopeless then 

krogstad  that may be so  but you had no right to throw me over for
anyone else s sake 

mrs  linde  indeed i don t know  many a time did i ask myself if i had
the right to do it 

krogstad (more gently)  when i lost you  it was as if all the solid
ground went from under my feet  look at me now  i am a shipwrecked man
clinging to a bit of wreckage 

mrs  linde  but help may be near 

krogstad  it was near  but then you came and stood in my way 

mrs  linde  unintentionally  nils  it was only today that i learned it
was your place i was going to take in the bank 

krogstad  i believe you  if you say so  but now that you know it  are
you not going to give it up to me?

mrs  linde  no  because that would not benefit you in the least 

krogstad  oh  benefit  benefit  i would have done it whether or no 

mrs  linde  i have learned to act prudently  life  and hard  bitter
necessity have taught me that 

krogstad  and life has taught me not to believe in fine speeches 

mrs  linde  then life has taught you something very reasonable  but
deeds you must believe in?

krogstad  what do you mean by that?

mrs  linde  you said you were like a shipwrecked man clinging to some
wreckage 

krogstad  i had good reason to say so 

mrs  linde  well  i am like a shipwrecked woman clinging to some
wreckage  no one to mourn for  no one to care for 

krogstad  it was your own choice 

mrs  linde  there was no other choice  then 

krogstad  well  what now?

mrs  linde  nils  how would it be if we two shipwrecked people could
join forces?

krogstad  what are you saying?

mrs  linde  two on the same piece of wreckage would stand a better
chance than each on their own 

krogstad  christine i   

mrs  linde  what do you suppose brought me to town?

krogstad  do you mean that you gave me a thought?

mrs  linde  i could not endure life without work  all my life  as long
as i can remember  i have worked  and it has been my greatest and
only pleasure  but now i am quite alone in the world  my life is so
dreadfully empty and i feel so forsaken  there is not the least pleasure
in working for one s self  nils  give me someone and something to work
for 

krogstad  i don t trust that  it is nothing but a woman s overstrained
sense of generosity that prompts you to make such an offer of yourself 

mrs  linde  have you ever noticed anything of the sort in me?

krogstad  could you really do it? tell me  do you know all about my past
life?

mrs  linde  yes 

krogstad  and do you know what they think of me here?

mrs  linde  you seemed to me to imply that with me you might have been
quite another man 

krogstad  i am certain of it 

mrs  linde  is it too late now?

krogstad  christine  are you saying this deliberately? yes  i am sure
you are  i see it in your face  have you really the courage  then  ?

mrs  linde  i want to be a mother to someone  and your children need
a mother  we two need each other  nils  i have faith in your real
character  i can dare anything together with you 

krogstad (grasps her hands)  thanks  thanks  christine! now i shall find
a way to clear myself in the eyes of the world  ah  but i forgot  

mrs  linde (listening)  hush! the tarantella! go  go!

krogstad  why? what is it?

mrs  linde  do you hear them up there? when that is over  we may expect
them back 

krogstad  yes  yes  i will go  but it is all no use  of course you are
not aware what steps i have taken in the matter of the helmers 

mrs  linde  yes  i know all about that 

krogstad  and in spite of that have you the courage to  ?

mrs  linde  i understand very well to what lengths a man like you might
be driven by despair 

krogstad  if i could only undo what i have done!

mrs  linde  you cannot  your letter is lying in the letter box now 

krogstad  are you sure of that?

mrs  linde  quite sure  but  

krogstad (with a searching look at her)  is that what it all
means?  that you want to save your friend at any cost? tell me frankly 
is that it?

mrs  linde  nils  a woman who has once sold herself for another s sake 
doesn t do it a second time 

krogstad  i will ask for my letter back 

mrs  linde  no  no 

krogstad  yes  of course i will  i will wait here until helmer comes  i
will tell him he must give me my letter back  that it only concerns my
dismissal  that he is not to read it  

mrs  linde  no  nils  you must not recall your letter 

krogstad  but  tell me  wasn t it for that very purpose that you asked
me to meet you here?

mrs  linde  in my first moment of fright  it was  but twenty four hours
have elapsed since then  and in that time i have witnessed incredible
things in this house  helmer must know all about it  this unhappy secret
must be disclosed  they must have a complete understanding between them 
which is impossible with all this concealment and falsehood going on 

krogstad  very well  if you will take the responsibility  but there is
one thing i can do in any case  and i shall do it at once 

mrs  linde (listening)  you must be quick and go! the dance is over  we
are not safe a moment longer 

krogstad  i will wait for you below 

mrs  linde  yes  do  you must see me back to my door   

krogstad  i have never had such an amazing piece of good fortune in my
life! (goes out through the outer door  the door between the room and
the hall remains open )

mrs  linde (tidying up the room and laying her hat and cloak ready) 
what a difference! what a difference! someone to work for and live
for  a home to bring comfort into  that i will do  indeed  i wish they
would be quick and come  (listens ) ah  there they are now  i must put
on my things  (takes up her hat and cloak  helmer s and nora s voices
are heard outside  a key is turned  and helmer brings nora almost by
force into the hall  she is in an italian costume with a large black
shawl around her  he is in evening dress  and a black domino which is
flying open )

nora (hanging back in the doorway  and struggling with him)  no  no 
no!  don t take me in  i want to go upstairs again  i don t want to
leave so early 

helmer  but  my dearest nora  

nora  please  torvald dear  please  please  only an hour more 

helmer  not a single minute  my sweet nora  you know that was our
agreement  come along into the room  you are catching cold standing
there  (he brings her gently into the room  in spite of her resistance )

mrs  linde  good evening 

nora  christine!

helmer  you here  so late  mrs  linde?

mrs  linde  yes  you must excuse me  i was so anxious to see nora in her
dress 

nora  have you been sitting here waiting for me?

mrs  linde  yes  unfortunately i came too late  you had already gone
upstairs  and i thought i couldn t go away again without having seen
you 

helmer (taking off nora s shawl)  yes  take a good look at her  i think
she is worth looking at  isn t she charming  mrs  linde?

mrs  linde  yes  indeed she is 

helmer  doesn t she look remarkably pretty? everyone thought so at the
dance  but she is terribly self willed  this sweet little person  what
are we to do with her? you will hardly believe that i had almost to
bring her away by force 

nora  torvald  you will repent not having let me stay  even if it were
only for half an hour 

helmer  listen to her  mrs  linde! she had danced her tarantella  and
it had been a tremendous success  as it deserved  although possibly the
performance was a trifle too realistic  a little more so  i mean  than
was strictly compatible with the limitations of art  but never mind
about that! the chief thing is  she had made a success  she had made
a tremendous success  do you think i was going to let her remain there
after that  and spoil the effect? no  indeed! i took my charming little
capri maiden  my capricious little capri maiden  i should say  on my
arm  took one quick turn round the room  a curtsey on either side  and 
as they say in novels  the beautiful apparition disappeared  an exit
ought always to be effective  mrs  linde  but that is what i cannot make
nora understand  pooh! this room is hot  (throws his domino on a chair 
and opens the door of his room ) hullo! it s all dark in here  oh  of
course  excuse me    (he goes in  and lights some candles )

nora (in a hurried and breathless whisper)  well?

mrs  linde (in a low voice)  i have had a talk with him 

nora  yes  and  

mrs  linde  nora  you must tell your husband all about it 

nora (in an expressionless voice)  i knew it 

mrs  linde  you have nothing to be afraid of as far as krogstad is
concerned  but you must tell him 

nora  i won t tell him 

mrs  linde  then the letter will 

nora  thank you  christine  now i know what i must do  hush  !

helmer (coming in again)  well  mrs  linde  have you admired her?

mrs  linde  yes  and now i will say goodnight 

helmer  what  already? is this yours  this knitting?

mrs  linde (taking it)  yes  thank you  i had very nearly forgotten it 

helmer  so you knit?

mrs  linde  of course 

helmer  do you know  you ought to embroider 

mrs  linde  really? why?

helmer  yes  it s far more becoming  let me show you  you hold
the embroidery thus in your left hand  and use the needle with the
right  like this  with a long  easy sweep  do you see?

mrs  linde  yes  perhaps  

helmer  but in the case of knitting  that can never be anything but
ungraceful  look here  the arms close together  the knitting needles
going up and down  it has a sort of chinese effect    that was really
excellent champagne they gave us 

mrs  linde  well   goodnight  nora  and don t be self willed any more 

helmer  that s right  mrs  linde 

mrs  linde  goodnight  mr  helmer 

helmer (accompanying her to the door)  goodnight  goodnight  i hope you
will get home all right  i should be very happy to  but you haven t any
great distance to go  goodnight  goodnight  (she goes out  he shuts the
door after her  and comes in again ) ah!  at last we have got rid of
her  she is a frightful bore  that woman 

nora  aren t you very tired  torvald?

helmer  no  not in the least 

nora  nor sleepy?

helmer  not a bit  on the contrary  i feel extraordinarily lively  and
you?  you really look both tired and sleepy 

nora  yes  i am very tired  i want to go to sleep at once 

helmer  there  you see it was quite right of me not to let you stay
there any longer 

nora  everything you do is quite right  torvald 

helmer (kissing her on the forehead)  now my little skylark is speaking
reasonably  did you notice what good spirits rank was in this evening?

nora  really? was he? i didn t speak to him at all 

helmer  and i very little  but i have not for a long time seen him in
such good form  (looks for a while at her and then goes nearer to her )
it is delightful to be at home by ourselves again  to be all alone with
you  you fascinating  charming little darling!

nora  don t look at me like that  torvald 

helmer  why shouldn t i look at my dearest treasure?  at all the beauty
that is mine  all my very own?

nora (going to the other side of the table)  you mustn t say things like
that to me tonight 

helmer (following her)  you have still got the tarantella in your blood 
i see  and it makes you more captivating than ever  listen  the guests
are beginning to go now  (in a lower voice ) nora  soon the whole house
will be quiet 

nora  yes  i hope so 

helmer  yes  my own darling nora  do you know  when i am out at a party
with you like this  why i speak so little to you  keep away from you 
and only send a stolen glance in your direction now and then?  do you
know why i do that? it is because i make believe to myself that we are
secretly in love  and you are my secretly promised bride  and that no
one suspects there is anything between us 

nora  yes  yes  i know very well your thoughts are with me all the time 

helmer  and when we are leaving  and i am putting the shawl over your
beautiful young shoulders  on your lovely neck  then i imagine that you
are my young bride and that we have just come from the wedding  and i am
bringing you for the first time into our home  to be alone with you for
the first time  quite alone with my shy little darling! all this evening
i have longed for nothing but you  when i watched the seductive figures
of the tarantella  my blood was on fire  i could endure it no longer 
and that was why i brought you down so early  

nora  go away  torvald! you must let me go  i won t  

helmer  what s that? you re joking  my little nora! you won t  you
won t? am i not your husband  ? (a knock is heard at the outer door )

nora (starting)  did you hear  ?

helmer (going into the hall)  who is it?

rank (outside)  it is i  may i come in for a moment?

helmer (in a fretful whisper)  oh  what does he want now? (aloud ) wait
a minute! (unlocks the door ) come  that s kind of you not to pass by
our door 

rank  i thought i heard your voice  and felt as if i should like to look
in  (with a swift glance round ) ah  yes!  these dear familiar rooms 
you are very happy and cosy in here  you two 

helmer  it seems to me that you looked after yourself pretty well
upstairs too 

rank  excellently  why shouldn t i? why shouldn t one enjoy everything
in this world?  at any rate as much as one can  and as long as one can 
the wine was capital  

helmer  especially the champagne 

rank  so you noticed that too? it is almost incredible how much i
managed to put away!

nora  torvald drank a great deal of champagne tonight too 

rank  did he?

nora  yes  and he is always in such good spirits afterwards 

rank  well  why should one not enjoy a merry evening after a well spent
day?

helmer  well spent? i am afraid i can t take credit for that 

rank (clapping him on the back)  but i can  you know!

nora  doctor rank  you must have been occupied with some scientific
investigation today 

rank  exactly 

helmer  just listen!  little nora talking about scientific
investigations!

nora  and may i congratulate you on the result?

rank  indeed you may 

nora  was it favourable  then?

rank  the best possible  for both doctor and patient  certainty 

nora (quickly and searchingly)  certainty?

rank  absolute certainty  so wasn t i entitled to make a merry evening
of it after that?

nora  yes  you certainly were  doctor rank  helmer  i think so too  so
long as you don t have to pay for it in the morning 

rank  oh well  one can t have anything in this life without paying for
it 

nora  doctor rank  are you fond of fancy dress balls?

rank  yes  if there is a fine lot of pretty costumes 

nora  tell me  what shall we two wear at the next?

helmer  little featherbrain!  are you thinking of the next already?

rank  we two? yes  i can tell you  you shall go as a good fairy  

helmer  yes  but what do you suggest as an appropriate costume for that?

rank  let your wife go dressed just as she is in everyday life 

helmer  that was really very prettily turned  but can t you tell us what
you will be?

rank  yes  my dear friend  i have quite made up my mind about that 

helmer  well?

rank  at the next fancy dress ball i shall be invisible 

helmer  that s a good joke!

rank  there is a big black hat  have you never heard of hats that make
you invisible? if you put one on  no one can see you 

helmer (suppressing a smile)  yes  you are quite right 

rank  but i am clean forgetting what i came for  helmer  give me a
cigar  one of the dark havanas 

helmer  with the greatest pleasure  (offers him his case )

rank (takes a cigar and cuts off the end)  thanks 

nora (striking a match)  let me give you a light 

rank  thank you  (she holds the match for him to light his cigar ) and
now goodbye!

helmer  goodbye  goodbye  dear old man!

nora  sleep well  doctor rank 

rank  thank you for that wish 

nora  wish me the same 

rank  you? well  if you want me to sleep well! and thanks for the light 
(he nods to them both and goes out )

helmer (in a subdued voice)  he has drunk more than he ought 

nora (absently)  maybe  (helmer takes a bunch of keys out of his pocket
and goes into the hall ) torvald! what are you going to do there?

helmer  emptying the letter box  it is quite full  there will be no room
to put the newspaper in tomorrow morning 

nora  are you going to work tonight?

helmer  you know quite well i m not  what is this? someone has been at
the lock 

nora  at the lock  ?

helmer  yes  someone has  what can it mean? i should never have thought
the maid    here is a broken hairpin  nora  it is one of yours 

nora (quickly)  then it must have been the children  

helmer  then you must get them out of those ways  there  at last i have
got it open  (takes out the contents of the letter box  and calls to the
kitchen ) helen!  helen  put out the light over the front door  (goes
back into the room and shuts the door into the hall  he holds out his
hand full of letters ) look at that  look what a heap of them there
are  (turning them over ) what on earth is that?

nora (at the window)  the letter  no! torvald  no!

helmer  two cards  of rank s 

nora  of doctor rank s?

helmer (looking at them)  doctor rank  they were on the top  he must
have put them in when he went out 

nora  is there anything written on them?

helmer  there is a black cross over the name  look there  what an
uncomfortable idea! it looks as if he were announcing his own death 

nora  it is just what he is doing 

helmer  what? do you know anything about it? has he said anything to
you?

nora  yes  he told me that when the cards came it would be his
leave taking from us  he means to shut himself up and die 

helmer  my poor old friend! certainly i knew we should not have him very
long with us  but so soon! and so he hides himself away like a wounded
animal 

nora  if it has to happen  it is best it should be without a word  don t
you think so  torvald?

helmer (walking up and down)  he had so grown into our lives  i can t
think of him as having gone out of them  he  with his sufferings and his
loneliness  was like a cloudy background to our sunlit happiness  well 
perhaps it is best so  for him  anyway  (standing still ) and perhaps
for us too  nora  we two are thrown quite upon each other now  (puts his
arms round her ) my darling wife  i don t feel as if i could hold you
tight enough  do you know  nora  i have often wished that you might be
threatened by some great danger  so that i might risk my life s blood 
and everything  for your sake 

nora (disengages herself  and says firmly and decidedly)  now you must
read your letters  torvald 

helmer  no  no  not tonight  i want to be with you  my darling wife 

nora  with the thought of your friend s death  

helmer  you are right  it has affected us both  something ugly has come
between us  the thought of the horrors of death  we must try and rid our
minds of that  until then  we will each go to our own room 

nora (hanging on his neck)  goodnight  torvald  goodnight!

helmer (kissing her on the forehead)  goodnight  my little singing bird 
sleep sound  nora  now i will read my letters through  (he takes his
letters and goes into his room  shutting the door after him )

nora (gropes distractedly about  seizes helmer s domino  throws it round
her  while she says in quick  hoarse  spasmodic whispers)  never to see
him again  never! never! (puts her shawl over her head ) never to see
my children again either  never again  never! never!  ah! the icy  black
water  the unfathomable depths  if only it were over! he has got it
now  now he is reading it  goodbye  torvald and my children! (she is
about to rush out through the hall  when helmer opens his door hurriedly
and stands with an open letter in his hand )

helmer  nora!

nora  ah!  

helmer  what is this? do you know what is in this letter?

nora  yes  i know  let me go! let me get out!

helmer (holding her back)  where are you going?

nora (trying to get free)  you shan t save me  torvald!

helmer (reeling)  true? is this true  that i read here? horrible! no 
no  it is impossible that it can be true 

nora  it is true  i have loved you above everything else in the world 

helmer  oh  don t let us have any silly excuses 

nora (taking a step towards him)  torvald  !

helmer  miserable creature  what have you done?

nora  let me go  you shall not suffer for my sake  you shall not take it
upon yourself 

helmer  no tragic airs  please  (locks the hall door ) here you shall
stay and give me an explanation  do you understand what you have done?
answer me! do you understand what you have done?

nora (looks steadily at him and says with a growing look of coldness in
her face)  yes  now i am beginning to understand thoroughly 

helmer (walking about the room)  what a horrible awakening! all these
eight years  she who was my joy and pride  a hypocrite  a liar  worse 
worse  a criminal! the unutterable ugliness of it all!  for shame! for
shame! (nora is silent and looks steadily at him  he stops in front of
her ) i ought to have suspected that something of the sort would happen 
i ought to have foreseen it  all your father s want of principle  be
silent!  all your father s want of principle has come out in you  no
religion  no morality  no sense of duty    how i am punished for having
winked at what he did! i did it for your sake  and this is how you repay
me 

nora  yes  that s just it 

helmer  now you have destroyed all my happiness  you have ruined all my
future  it is horrible to think of! i am in the power of an unscrupulous
man  he can do what he likes with me  ask anything he likes of me  give
me any orders he pleases  i dare not refuse  and i must sink to such
miserable depths because of a thoughtless woman!

nora  when i am out of the way  you will be free 

helmer  no fine speeches  please  your father had always plenty of those
ready  too  what good would it be to me if you were out of the way  as
you say? not the slightest  he can make the affair known everywhere  and
if he does  i may be falsely suspected of having been a party to your
criminal action  very likely people will think i was behind it all  that
it was i who prompted you! and i have to thank you for all this  you
whom i have cherished during the whole of our married life  do you
understand now what it is you have done for me?

nora (coldly and quietly)  yes 

helmer  it is so incredible that i can t take it in  but we must come to
some understanding  take off that shawl  take it off  i tell you  i must
try and appease him some way or another  the matter must be hushed up at
any cost  and as for you and me  it must appear as if everything between
us were just as before  but naturally only in the eyes of the world  you
will still remain in my house  that is a matter of course  but i shall
not allow you to bring up the children  i dare not trust them to you 
to think that i should be obliged to say so to one whom i have loved
so dearly  and whom i still    no  that is all over  from this moment
happiness is not the question  all that concerns us is to save the
remains  the fragments  the appearance  

(a ring is heard at the front door bell )

helmer (with a start)  what is that? so late! can the worst  ? can he  ?
hide yourself  nora  say you are ill 

(nora stands motionless  helmer goes and unlocks the hall door )

maid (half dressed  comes to the door)  a letter for the mistress 

helmer  give it to me  (takes the letter  and shuts the door ) yes  it
is from him  you shall not have it  i will read it myself 

nora  yes  read it 

helmer (standing by the lamp)  i scarcely have the courage to do it  it
may mean ruin for both of us  no  i must know  (tears open the letter 
runs his eye over a few lines  looks at a paper enclosed  and gives a
shout of joy ) nora! (she looks at him questioningly ) nora!  no  i must
read it once again    yes  it is true! i am saved! nora  i am saved!

nora  and i?

helmer  you too  of course  we are both saved  both you and i  look  he
sends you your bond back  he says he regrets and repents  that a happy
change in his life  never mind what he says! we are saved  nora! no one
can do anything to you  oh  nora  nora!  no  first i must destroy these
hateful things  let me see    (takes a look at the bond ) no  no  i
won t look at it  the whole thing shall be nothing but a bad dream to
me  (tears up the bond and both letters  throws them all into the stove 
and watches them burn ) there  now it doesn t exist any longer  he says
that since christmas eve you    these must have been three dreadful days
for you  nora 

nora  i have fought a hard fight these three days 

helmer  and suffered agonies  and seen no way out but    no  we won t
call any of the horrors to mind  we will only shout with joy  and keep
saying   it s all over! it s all over!  listen to me  nora  you don t
seem to realise that it is all over  what is this?  such a cold  set
face! my poor little nora  i quite understand  you don t feel as if you
could believe that i have forgiven you  but it is true  nora  i swear
it  i have forgiven you everything  i know that what you did  you did
out of love for me 

nora  that is true 

helmer  you have loved me as a wife ought to love her husband  only you
had not sufficient knowledge to judge of the means you used  but do you
suppose you are any the less dear to me  because you don t understand
how to act on your own responsibility? no  no  only lean on me  i
will advise you and direct you  i should not be a man if this womanly
helplessness did not just give you a double attractiveness in my eyes 
you must not think anymore about the hard things i said in my first
moment of consternation  when i thought everything was going to
overwhelm me  i have forgiven you  nora  i swear to you i have forgiven
you 

nora  thank you for your forgiveness  (she goes out through the door to
the right )

helmer  no  don t go    (looks in ) what are you doing in there?

nora (from within)  taking off my fancy dress 

helmer (standing at the open door)  yes  do  try and calm yourself 
and make your mind easy again  my frightened little singing bird  be at
rest  and feel secure  i have broad wings to shelter you under  (walks
up and down by the door ) how warm and cosy our home is  nora  here is
shelter for you  here i will protect you like a hunted dove that i
have saved from a hawk s claws  i will bring peace to your poor beating
heart  it will come  little by little  nora  believe me  tomorrow
morning you will look upon it all quite differently  soon everything
will be just as it was before  very soon you won t need me to assure you
that i have forgiven you  you will yourself feel the certainty that i
have done so  can you suppose i should ever think of such a thing as
repudiating you  or even reproaching you? you have no idea what a true
man s heart is like  nora  there is something so indescribably sweet
and satisfying  to a man  in the knowledge that he has forgiven his
wife  forgiven her freely  and with all his heart  it seems as if that
had made her  as it were  doubly his own  he has given her a new life 
so to speak  and she has in a way become both wife and child to him  so
you shall be for me after this  my little scared  helpless darling  have
no anxiety about anything  nora  only be frank and open with me  and i
will serve as will and conscience both to you    what is this? not gone
to bed? have you changed your things?

nora (in everyday dress)  yes  torvald  i have changed my things now 

helmer  but what for?  so late as this 

nora  i shall not sleep tonight 

helmer  but  my dear nora  

nora (looking at her watch)  it is not so very late  sit down here 
torvald  you and i have much to say to one another  (she sits down at
one side of the table )

helmer  nora  what is this?  this cold  set face?

nora  sit down  it will take some time  i have a lot to talk over with
you 

helmer (sits down at the opposite side of the table)  you alarm me 
nora!  and i don t understand you 

nora  no  that is just it  you don t understand me  and i have never
understood you either  before tonight  no  you mustn t interrupt me 
you must simply listen to what i say  torvald  this is a settling of
accounts 

helmer  what do you mean by that?

nora (after a short silence)  isn t there one thing that strikes you as
strange in our sitting here like this?

helmer  what is that?

nora  we have been married now eight years  does it not occur to you
that this is the first time we two  you and i  husband and wife  have
had a serious conversation?

helmer  what do you mean by serious?

nora  in all these eight years  longer than that  from the very
beginning of our acquaintance  we have never exchanged a word on any
serious subject 

helmer  was it likely that i would be continually and forever telling
you about worries that you could not help me to bear?

nora  i am not speaking about business matters  i say that we have never
sat down in earnest together to try and get at the bottom of anything 

helmer  but  dearest nora  would it have been any good to you?

nora  that is just it  you have never understood me  i have been greatly
wronged  torvald  first by papa and then by you 

helmer  what! by us two  by us two  who have loved you better than
anyone else in the world?

nora (shaking her head)  you have never loved me  you have only thought
it pleasant to be in love with me 

helmer  nora  what do i hear you saying?

nora  it is perfectly true  torvald  when i was at home with papa  he
told me his opinion about everything  and so i had the same opinions 
and if i differed from him i concealed the fact  because he would not
have liked it  he called me his doll child  and he played with me just
as i used to play with my dolls  and when i came to live with you  

helmer  what sort of an expression is that to use about our marriage?

nora (undisturbed)  i mean that i was simply transferred from papa s
hands into yours  you arranged everything according to your own taste 
and so i got the same tastes as you  or else i pretended to  i am really
not quite sure which  i think sometimes the one and sometimes the other 
when i look back on it  it seems to me as if i had been living here like
a poor woman  just from hand to mouth  i have existed merely to perform
tricks for you  torvald  but you would have it so  you and papa have
committed a great sin against me  it is your fault that i have made
nothing of my life 

helmer  how unreasonable and how ungrateful you are  nora! have you not
been happy here?

nora  no  i have never been happy  i thought i was  but it has never
really been so 

helmer  not  not happy!

nora  no  only merry  and you have always been so kind to me  but our
home has been nothing but a playroom  i have been your doll wife  just
as at home i was papa s doll child  and here the children have been
my dolls  i thought it great fun when you played with me  just as they
thought it great fun when i played with them  that is what our marriage
has been  torvald 

helmer  there is some truth in what you say  exaggerated and strained as
your view of it is  but for the future it shall be different  playtime
shall be over  and lesson time shall begin 

nora  whose lessons? mine  or the children s?

helmer  both yours and the children s  my darling nora 

nora  alas  torvald  you are not the man to educate me into being a
proper wife for you 

helmer  and you can say that!

nora  and i  how am i fitted to bring up the children?

helmer  nora!

nora  didn t you say so yourself a little while ago  that you dare not
trust me to bring them up?

helmer  in a moment of anger! why do you pay any heed to that?

nora  indeed  you were perfectly right  i am not fit for the task 
there is another task i must undertake first  i must try and educate
myself  you are not the man to help me in that  i must do that for
myself  and that is why i am going to leave you now 

helmer (springing up)  what do you say?

nora  i must stand quite alone  if i am to understand myself and
everything about me  it is for that reason that i cannot remain with you
any longer 

helmer  nora  nora!

nora  i am going away from here now  at once  i am sure christine will
take me in for the night  

helmer  you are out of your mind! i won t allow it! i forbid you!

nora  it is no use forbidding me anything any longer  i will take with
me what belongs to myself  i will take nothing from you  either now or
later 

helmer  what sort of madness is this!

nora  tomorrow i shall go home  i mean  to my old home  it will be
easiest for me to find something to do there 

helmer  you blind  foolish woman!

nora  i must try and get some sense  torvald 

helmer  to desert your home  your husband and your children! and you
don t consider what people will say!

nora  i cannot consider that at all  i only know that it is necessary
for me 

helmer  it s shocking  this is how you would neglect your most sacred
duties 

nora  what do you consider my most sacred duties?

helmer  do i need to tell you that? are they not your duties to your
husband and your children?

nora  i have other duties just as sacred 

helmer  that you have not  what duties could those be?

nora  duties to myself 

helmer  before all else  you are a wife and a mother 

nora  i don t believe that any longer  i believe that before all else i
am a reasonable human being  just as you are  or  at all events  that
i must try and become one  i know quite well  torvald  that most people
would think you right  and that views of that kind are to be found in
books  but i can no longer content myself with what most people say  or
with what is found in books  i must think over things for myself and get
to understand them 

helmer  can you not understand your place in your own home? have you not
a reliable guide in such matters as that?  have you no religion?

nora  i am afraid  torvald  i do not exactly know what religion is 

helmer  what are you saying?

nora  i know nothing but what the clergyman said  when i went to be
confirmed  he told us that religion was this  and that  and the other 
when i am away from all this  and am alone  i will look into that matter
too  i will see if what the clergyman said is true  or at all events if
it is true for me 

helmer  this is unheard of in a girl of your age! but if religion cannot
lead you aright  let me try and awaken your conscience  i suppose you
have some moral sense? or  answer me  am i to think you have none?

nora  i assure you  torvald  that is not an easy question to answer  i
really don t know  the thing perplexes me altogether  i only know that
you and i look at it in quite a different light  i am learning  too 
that the law is quite another thing from what i supposed  but i find it
impossible to convince myself that the law is right  according to it
a woman has no right to spare her old dying father  or to save her
husband s life  i can t believe that 

helmer  you talk like a child  you don t understand the conditions of
the world in which you live 

nora  no  i don t  but now i am going to try  i am going to see if i can
make out who is right  the world or i 

helmer  you are ill  nora  you are delirious  i almost think you are out
of your mind 

nora  i have never felt my mind so clear and certain as tonight 

helmer  and is it with a clear and certain mind that you forsake your
husband and your children?

nora  yes  it is 

helmer  then there is only one possible explanation 

nora  what is that?

helmer  you do not love me anymore 

nora  no  that is just it 

helmer  nora!  and you can say that?

nora  it gives me great pain  torvald  for you have always been so kind
to me  but i cannot help it  i do not love you any more 

helmer (regaining his composure)  is that a clear and certain conviction
too?

nora  yes  absolutely clear and certain  that is the reason why i will
not stay here any longer 

helmer  and can you tell me what i have done to forfeit your love?

nora  yes  indeed i can  it was tonight  when the wonderful thing did
not happen  then i saw you were not the man i had thought you were 

helmer  explain yourself better  i don t understand you 

nora  i have waited so patiently for eight years  for  goodness knows 
i knew very well that wonderful things don t happen every day  then this
horrible misfortune came upon me  and then i felt quite certain that the
wonderful thing was going to happen at last  when krogstad s letter was
lying out there  never for a moment did i imagine that you would consent
to accept this man s conditions  i was so absolutely certain that you
would say to him  publish the thing to the whole world  and when that
was done  

helmer  yes  what then?  when i had exposed my wife to shame and
disgrace?

nora  when that was done  i was so absolutely certain  you would come
forward and take everything upon yourself  and say  i am the guilty one 

helmer  nora  !

nora  you mean that i would never have accepted such a sacrifice on your
part? no  of course not  but what would my assurances have been worth
against yours? that was the wonderful thing which i hoped for and
feared  and it was to prevent that  that i wanted to kill myself 

helmer  i would gladly work night and day for you  nora  bear sorrow and
want for your sake  but no man would sacrifice his honour for the one he
loves 

nora  it is a thing hundreds of thousands of women have done 

helmer  oh  you think and talk like a heedless child 

nora  maybe  but you neither think nor talk like the man i could bind
myself to  as soon as your fear was over  and it was not fear for what
threatened me  but for what might happen to you  when the whole thing
was past  as far as you were concerned it was exactly as if nothing at
all had happened  exactly as before  i was your little skylark  your
doll  which you would in future treat with doubly gentle care  because
it was so brittle and fragile  (getting up ) torvald  it was then
it dawned upon me that for eight years i had been living here with a
strange man  and had borne him three children    oh  i can t bear to
think of it! i could tear myself into little bits!

helmer (sadly)  i see  i see  an abyss has opened between us  there is
no denying it  but  nora  would it not be possible to fill it up?

nora  as i am now  i am no wife for you 

helmer  i have it in me to become a different man 

nora  perhaps  if your doll is taken away from you 

helmer  but to part!  to part from you! no  no  nora  i can t understand
that idea 

nora (going out to the right)  that makes it all the more certain that
it must be done  (she comes back with her cloak and hat and a small bag
which she puts on a chair by the table )

helmer  nora  nora  not now! wait until tomorrow 

nora (putting on her cloak)  i cannot spend the night in a strange man s
room 

helmer  but can t we live here like brother and sister  ?

nora (putting on her hat)  you know very well that would not last long 
(puts the shawl round her ) goodbye  torvald  i won t see the little
ones  i know they are in better hands than mine  as i am now  i can be
of no use to them 

helmer  but some day  nora  some day?

nora  how can i tell? i have no idea what is going to become of me 

helmer  but you are my wife  whatever becomes of you 

nora  listen  torvald  i have heard that when a wife deserts her
husband s house  as i am doing now  he is legally freed from all
obligations towards her  in any case  i set you free from all your
obligations  you are not to feel yourself bound in the slightest way 
any more than i shall  there must be perfect freedom on both sides  see 
here is your ring back  give me mine 

helmer  that too?

nora  that too 

helmer  here it is 

nora  that s right  now it is all over  i have put the keys here 
the maids know all about everything in the house  better than i do 
tomorrow  after i have left her  christine will come here and pack up my
own things that i brought with me from home  i will have them sent after
me 

helmer  all over! all over!  nora  shall you never think of me again?

nora  i know i shall often think of you  the children  and this house 

helmer  may i write to you  nora?

nora  no  never  you must not do that 

helmer  but at least let me send you  

nora  nothing  nothing  

helmer  let me help you if you are in want 

nora  no  i can receive nothing from a stranger 

helmer  nora  can i never be anything more than a stranger to you?

nora (taking her bag)  ah  torvald  the most wonderful thing of all
would have to happen 

helmer  tell me what that would be!

nora  both you and i would have to be so changed that    oh  torvald  i
don t believe any longer in wonderful things happening 

helmer  but i will believe in it  tell me! so changed that  ?

nora  that our life together would be a real wedlock  goodbye  (she goes
out through the hall )

helmer (sinks down on a chair at the door and buries his face in his
hands)  nora! nora! (looks round  and rises ) empty  she is gone  (a
hope flashes across his mind ) the most wonderful thing of all  ?

(the sound of a door shutting is heard from below )





end of the project gutenberg ebook of a doll s house  by henrik ibsen

    end of this project gutenberg ebook a doll s house    

      this file should be named 2542 txt or 2542 zip      
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in 
        http //www gutenberg org/2/5/4/2542/

produced by martin adamson

updated editions will replace the previous one  the old editions
will be renamed 

creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works  so the foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties   special rules 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license  apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg tm concept and trademark   project
gutenberg is a registered trademark  and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks  unless you receive specific permission   if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook  complying with the
rules is very easy   you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works  reports  performances and
research   they may be modified and printed and given away  you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks   redistribution is
subject to the trademark license  especially commercial
redistribution 



    start  full license    

the full project gutenberg license
please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenberg tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works  by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase  project
gutenberg )  you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg tm license (available with this file or online at
http //gutenberg org/license) 


section 1   general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg tm
electronic works

1 a   by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg tm
electronic work  you indicate that you have read  understand  agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement   if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement  you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg tm electronic works in your possession 
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement  you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1 e 8 

1 b    project gutenberg  is a registered trademark   it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement   there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement   see
paragraph 1 c below   there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg tm electronic
works   see paragraph 1 e below 

1 c   the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ( the foundation 
or pglaf)  owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg tm electronic works   nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states   if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states  we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying  distributing  performing  displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed   of course  we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg tm name associated with
the work   you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg tm license when you share it without charge with others 

1 d   the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work   copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change   if you are outside the united states  check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading  copying  displaying  performing  distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg tm work   the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states 

1 e   unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg 

1 e 1   the following sentence  with active links to  or other immediate
access to  the full project gutenberg tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg tm work (any work on which the
phrase  project gutenberg  appears  or with which the phrase  project
gutenberg  is associated) is accessed  displayed  performed  viewed 
copied or distributed 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever   you may copy it  give it away or
re use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www gutenberg org

1 e 2   if an individual project gutenberg tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder)  the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges   if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase  project gutenberg  associated with or appearing on the
work  you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1 e 1
through 1 e 7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1 e 8 or
1 e 9 

1 e 3   if an individual project gutenberg tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder  your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1 e 1 through 1 e 7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder   additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work 

1 e 4   do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg tm
license terms from this work  or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg tm 

1 e 5   do not copy  display  perform  distribute or redistribute this
electronic work  or any part of this electronic work  without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1 e 1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg tm license 

1 e 6   you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary 
compressed  marked up  nonproprietary or proprietary form  including any
word processing or hypertext form   however  if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg tm work in a format other than
 plain vanilla ascii  or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg tm web site (www gutenberg org) 
you must  at no additional cost  fee or expense to the user  provide a
copy  a means of exporting a copy  or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request  of the work in its original  plain vanilla ascii  or other
form   any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg tm
license as specified in paragraph 1 e 1 

1 e 7   do not charge a fee for access to  viewing  displaying 
performing  copying or distributing any project gutenberg tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1 e 8 or 1 e 9 

1 e 8   you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg tm electronic works provided
that

  you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of project gutenberg tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes   the fee is
     owed to the owner of the project gutenberg tm trademark  but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     project gutenberg literary archive foundation   royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns   royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the
     address specified in section 4   information about donations to
     the project gutenberg literary archive foundation  

  you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg tm
     license   you must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     project gutenberg tm works 

  you provide  in accordance with paragraph 1 f 3  a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy  if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work 

  you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of project gutenberg tm works 

1 e 9   if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement  you must obtain permission in writing from
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael
hart  the owner of the project gutenberg tm trademark   contact the
foundation as set forth in section 3 below 

1 f 

1 f 1   project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify  do copyright research on  transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the project gutenberg tm
collection   despite these efforts  project gutenberg tm electronic
works  and the medium on which they may be stored  may contain
 defects   such as  but not limited to  incomplete  inaccurate or
corrupt data  transcription errors  a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement  a defective or damaged disk or other medium  a
computer virus  or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment 

1 f 2   limited warranty  disclaimer of damages   except for the  right
of replacement or refund  described in paragraph 1 f 3  the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation  the owner of the project
gutenberg tm trademark  and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg tm electronic work under this agreement  disclaim all
liability to you for damages  costs and expenses  including legal
fees   you agree that you have no remedies for negligence  strict
liability  breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph f3   you agree that the foundation  the
trademark owner  and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual  direct  indirect  consequential  punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage 

1 f 3   limited right of replacement or refund   if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it  you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from   if you
received the work on a physical medium  you must return the medium with
your written explanation   the person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund   if you received the work electronically  the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund   if the second copy
is also defective  you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem 

1 f 4   except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1 f 3  this work is provided to you  as is  with no other
warranties of any kind  express or implied  including but not limited to
warranties of merchantibility or fitness for any purpose 

1 f 5   some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement  the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law   the invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions 

1 f 6   indemnity   you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation  the
trademark owner  any agent or employee of the foundation  anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement  and any volunteers associated with the production 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg tm electronic works 
harmless from all liability  costs and expenses  including legal fees 
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur  (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg tm
work  (b) alteration  modification  or additions or deletions to any
project gutenberg tm work  and (c) any defect you cause 


section  2   information about the mission of project gutenberg tm

project gutenberg tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete  old  middle aged and new computers   it exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life 

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need  is critical to reaching project gutenberg tm s
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come   in 2001  the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg tm and future generations 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help  see sections 3 and 4
and the foundation web page at http //www pglaf org 


section 3   information about the project gutenberg literary archive
foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service   the foundation s ein or federal tax identification
number is 64 6221541   its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http //pglaf org/fundraising   contributions to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by u s  federal laws and your state s laws 

the foundation s principal office is located at 4557 melan dr  s 
fairbanks  ak  99712   but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations   its business office is located at
809 north 1500 west  salt lake city  ut 84116  (801) 596 1887  email
business@pglaf org   email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the foundation s web site and official
page at http //pglaf org

for additional contact information 
     dr  gregory b  newby
     chief executive and director
     gbnewby@pglaf org


section 4   information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenberg tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment   many small donations
($1 to $5 000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs 

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states   compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort  much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements   we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance   to
send donations or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http //pglaf org

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements  we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate 

international donations are gratefully accepted  but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states   u s  laws alone swamp our small staff 

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses   donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks  online payments and credit card donations 
to donate  please visit  http //pglaf org/donate


section 5   general information about project gutenberg tm electronic
works 

professor michael s  hart is the originator of the project gutenberg tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone   for thirty years  he produced and distributed project
gutenberg tm ebooks with only a loose network of volunteer support 


project gutenberg tm ebooks are often created from several printed
editions  all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u s 
unless a copyright notice is included   thus  we do not necessarily
keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper edition 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility 

     http //www gutenberg org

this web site includes information about project gutenberg tm 
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation  how to help produce our new ebooks  and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks 
